<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="en-US" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: http://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Chapter 8</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="part-1" epub:type="part">
			<section id="chapter-1-8" epub:type="chapter">
				<h3 epub:type="title">
					<span class="first-child" epub:type="z3998:roman">VIII</span>
					<span class="epub-type-subtitle" lang="la" epub:type="subtitle" xml:lang="la">Mobilis in Mobili</span>
				</h3>
				<p>This bru­tally ex­e­cuted cap­ture was car­ried out with light­ning speed. My com­pan­ions and I had no time to col­lect our­selves. I don’t know how they felt about be­ing shoved in­side this aquatic prison, but as for me, I was shiv­er­ing all over. With whom were we deal­ing? Surely with some new breed of pi­rates, ex­ploit­ing the sea af­ter their own fash­ion.</p>
				<p>The nar­row hatch had barely closed over me when I was sur­rounded by pro­found dark­ness. Sat­u­rated with the out­side light, my eyes couldn’t make out a thing. I felt my naked feet cling­ing to the steps of an iron lad­der. Forcibly seized, Ned Land and Con­seil were be­hind me. At the foot of the lad­der, a door opened and in­stantly closed be­hind us with a loud clang.</p>
				<p>We were alone. Where? I couldn’t say, could barely even imag­ine. All was dark­ness, but such ut­ter dark­ness that af­ter sev­eral min­utes, my eyes were still un­able to catch a sin­gle one of those hazy gleams that drift through even the black­est nights.</p>
				<p>Mean­while, fu­ri­ous at these go­ings on, Ned Land gave free rein to his in­dig­na­tion.</p>
				<p>“Dam­na­tion!” he ex­claimed. “Th­ese peo­ple are about as hos­pitable as the sav­ages of New Cale­do­nia! All that’s lack­ing is for them to be can­ni­bals! I wouldn’t be sur­prised if they were, but be­lieve you me, they won’t eat me with­out my kick­ing up a protest!”</p>
				<p>“Calm your­self, Ned my friend,” Con­seil replied serenely. “Don’t flare up so quickly! We aren’t in a ket­tle yet!”</p>
				<p>“In a ket­tle, no,” the Cana­dian shot back, “but in an oven for sure. It’s dark enough for one. Luck­ily my Bowie knife hasn’t left me, and I can still see well enough to put it to use.<a class="epub-type-noteref" href="../text/endnotes.xhtml#note-5" id="note-5" epub:type="noteref">5</a> The first one of these ban­dits who lays a hand on me—”</p>
				<p>“Don’t be so ir­ri­ta­ble, Ned,” I then told the har­pooner, “and don’t ruin things for us with point­less vi­o­lence. Who knows whether they might be lis­ten­ing to us? In­stead, let’s try to find out where we are!”</p>
				<p>I started mov­ing, grop­ing my way. After five steps I en­coun­tered an iron wall made of riv­eted boil­er­plate. Then, turn­ing around, I bumped into a wooden ta­ble next to which sev­eral stools had been set. The floor of this prison lay hid­den be­neath thick, hempen mat­ting that dead­ened the sound of foot­steps. Its naked walls didn’t re­veal any trace of a door or win­dow. Go­ing around the op­po­site way, Con­seil met up with me, and we re­turned to the mid­dle of this cabin, which had to be twenty feet long by ten wide. As for its height, not even Ned Land, with his great stature, was able to de­ter­mine it.</p>
				<p>Half an hour had al­ready gone by with­out our sit­u­a­tion chang­ing, when our eyes were sud­denly spir­ited from ut­ter dark­ness into blind­ing light. Our prison lit up all at once; in other words, it filled with lu­mi­nes­cent mat­ter so in­tense that at first I couldn’t stand the bright­ness of it. From its glare and white­ness, I rec­og­nized the elec­tric glow that had played around this un­der­wa­ter boat like some mag­nif­i­cent phos­pho­res­cent phe­nom­e­non. After in­vol­un­tar­ily clos­ing my eyes, I re­opened them and saw that this lu­mi­nous force came from a frosted half globe curv­ing out of the cabin’s ceil­ing.</p>
				<p>“Fi­nally! It’s light enough to see!” Ned Land ex­claimed, knife in hand, stay­ing on the de­fen­sive.</p>
				<p>“Yes,” I replied, then ven­tured the op­po­site view. “But as for our sit­u­a­tion, we’re still in the dark.”</p>
				<p>“Master must learn pa­tience,” said the emo­tion­less Con­seil.</p>
				<p>This sud­den il­lu­mi­na­tion of our cabin en­abled me to ex­am­ine its tini­est de­tails. It con­tained only a ta­ble and five stools. Its in­vis­i­ble door must have been her­met­i­cally sealed. Not a sound reached our ears. Every­thing seemed dead in­side this boat. Was it in mo­tion, or sta­tion­ary on the sur­face of the ocean, or sink­ing into the depths? I couldn’t tell.</p>
				<p>But this lu­mi­nous globe hadn’t been turned on with­out good rea­son. Con­se­quently, I hoped that some crew­men would soon make an ap­pear­ance. If you want to con­sign peo­ple to obliv­ion, you don’t light up their dun­geons.</p>
				<p>I was not mis­taken. Un­lock­ing noises be­came au­di­ble, a door opened, and two men ap­peared.</p>
				<p>One was short and stocky, pow­er­fully mus­cled, broad shoul­dered, ro­bust of limbs, the head squat, the hair black and lux­u­ri­ant, the mus­tache heavy, the eyes bright and pen­e­trat­ing, and his whole per­son­al­ity stamped with that south­ern-blooded zest that, in France, typ­i­fies the peo­ple of Provence. The philoso­pher Diderot has very aptly claimed that a man’s bear­ing is the clue to his char­ac­ter, and this stocky lit­tle man was cer­tainly a liv­ing proof of this claim. You could sense that his ev­ery­day con­ver­sa­tion must have been packed with such vivid fig­ures of speech as per­son­i­fi­ca­tion, sym­bol­ism, and mis­placed mod­i­fiers. But I was never in a po­si­tion to ver­ify this be­cause, around me, he used only an odd and ut­terly in­com­pre­hen­si­ble di­alect.</p>
				<p>The sec­ond stranger de­serves a more de­tailed de­scrip­tion. A dis­ci­ple of such char­ac­ter-judg­ing anatomists as Gra­ti­o­let or En­gel could have read this man’s fea­tures like an open book. Without hes­i­ta­tion, I iden­ti­fied his dom­i­nant qual­i­ties—self-con­fi­dence, since his head reared like a no­ble­man’s above the arc formed by the lines of his shoul­ders, and his black eyes gazed with icy as­sur­ance; calm­ness, since his skin, pale rather than ruddy, in­di­cated tran­quil­ity of blood; en­ergy, shown by the swiftly knit­ting mus­cles of his brow; and fi­nally courage, since his deep breath­ing de­noted tremen­dous re­serves of vi­tal­ity.</p>
				<p>I might add that this was a man of great pride, that his calm, firm gaze seemed to re­flect think­ing on an el­e­vated plane, and that the har­mony of his fa­cial ex­pres­sions and bod­ily move­ments re­sulted in an over­all ef­fect of un­ques­tion­able can­dor—ac­cord­ing to the find­ings of phys­iog­nomists, those an­a­lysts of fa­cial char­ac­ter.</p>
				<p>I felt “in­vol­un­tar­ily re­as­sured” in his pres­ence, and this boded well for our in­ter­view.</p>
				<p>Whether this in­di­vid­ual was thirty-five or fifty years of age, I could not pre­cisely state. He was tall, his fore­head broad, his nose straight, his mouth clearly etched, his teeth mag­nif­i­cent, his hands re­fined, ta­pered, and to use a word from palm­istry, highly “psy­chic,” in other words, wor­thy of serv­ing a lofty and pas­sion­ate spirit. This man was cer­tainly the most won­der­ful phys­i­cal spec­i­men I had ever en­coun­tered. One un­usual de­tail: his eyes were spaced a lit­tle far from each other and could in­stantly take in nearly a quar­ter of the hori­zon. This abil­ity—as I later ver­i­fied—was strength­ened by a range of vi­sion even greater than Ned Land’s. When this stranger fo­cused his gaze on an ob­ject, his eye­brow lines gath­ered into a frown, his heavy eye­lids closed around his pupils to con­tract his huge field of vi­sion, and he looked! What a look—as if he could mag­nify ob­jects shrink­ing into the dis­tance; as if he could probe your very soul; as if he could pierce those sheets of wa­ter so opaque to our eyes and scan the deep­est seas … !</p>
				<p>Wear­ing caps made of sea-ot­ter fur, and shod in seal­skin fish­ing boots, these two strangers were dressed in cloth­ing made from some unique fab­ric that flat­tered the fig­ure and al­lowed great free­dom of move­ment.</p>
				<p>The taller of the two—ap­par­ently the leader on board—ex­am­ined us with the great­est care but with­out pro­nounc­ing a word. Then, turn­ing to his com­pan­ion, he con­versed with him in a lan­guage I didn’t rec­og­nize. It was a sonorous, har­mo­nious, flex­i­ble di­alect whose vow­els seemed to un­dergo a highly var­ied ac­cen­tu­a­tion.</p>
				<p>The other replied with a shake of the head and added two or three ut­terly in­com­pre­hen­si­ble words. Then he seemed to ques­tion me di­rectly with a long stare.</p>
				<p>I replied in clear French that I wasn’t fa­mil­iar with his lan­guage; but he didn’t seem to un­der­stand me, and the sit­u­a­tion grew rather baf­fling.</p>
				<p>“Still, mas­ter should tell our story,” Con­seil said to me. “Per­haps these gen­tle­men will grasp a few words of it!”</p>
				<p>I tried again, telling the tale of our ad­ven­tures, clearly ar­tic­u­lat­ing my ev­ery syl­la­ble, and not leav­ing out a sin­gle de­tail. I stated our names and ti­tles; then, in or­der, I in­tro­duced Pro­fes­sor Aron­nax, his manser­vant Con­seil, and Mr. Ned Land, har­pooner.</p>
				<p>The man with calm, gen­tle eyes lis­tened to me serenely, even cour­te­ously, and paid re­mark­able at­ten­tion. But noth­ing in his fa­cial ex­pres­sion in­di­cated that he un­der­stood my story. When I fin­ished, he didn’t pro­nounce a sin­gle word.</p>
				<p>One re­source still left was to speak English. Per­haps they would be fa­mil­iar with this nearly uni­ver­sal lan­guage. But I only knew it, as I did the Ger­man lan­guage, well enough to read it flu­ently, not well enough to speak it cor­rectly. Here, how­ever, our over­rid­ing need was to make our­selves un­der­stood.</p>
				<p>“Come on, it’s your turn,” I told the har­pooner. “Over to you, Mr. Land. Pull out of your bag of tricks the best English ever spo­ken by an An­glo-Saxon, and try for a more fa­vor­able re­sult than mine.”</p>
				<p>Ned needed no per­suad­ing and started our story all over again, most of which I could fol­low. Its con­tent was the same, but the form dif­fered. Car­ried away by his volatile tem­per­a­ment, the Cana­dian put great an­i­ma­tion into it. He com­plained ve­he­mently about be­ing im­pris­oned in de­fi­ance of his civil rights, asked by virtue of which law he was hereby de­tained, in­voked writs of habeas cor­pus, threat­ened to press charges against any­one hold­ing him in il­le­gal cus­tody, ranted, ges­tic­u­lated, shouted, and fi­nally con­veyed by an ex­pres­sive ges­ture that we were dy­ing of hunger.</p>
				<p>This was per­fectly true, but we had nearly for­got­ten the fact.</p>
				<p>Much to his amaze­ment, the har­pooner seemed no more in­tel­li­gi­ble than I had been. Our vis­i­tors didn’t bat an eye. Ap­par­ently they were en­gi­neers who un­der­stood the lan­guages of nei­ther the French physi­cist Arago nor the English physi­cist Fara­day.</p>
				<p>Thor­oughly baf­fled af­ter vainly ex­haust­ing our philo­log­i­cal re­sources, I no longer knew what tac­tic to pur­sue, when Con­seil told me:</p>
				<p>“If mas­ter will au­tho­rize me, I’ll tell the whole busi­ness in Ger­man.”</p>
				<p>“What! You know Ger­man?” I ex­claimed.</p>
				<p>“Like most Flem­ish peo­ple, with all due re­spect to mas­ter.”</p>
				<p>“On the con­trary, my re­spect is due you. Go to it, my boy.”</p>
				<p>And Con­seil, in his serene voice, de­scribed for the third time the var­i­ous vi­cis­si­tudes of our story. But de­spite our nar­ra­tor’s fine ac­cent and stylish turns of phrase, the Ger­man lan­guage met with no suc­cess.</p>
				<p>Fi­nally, as a last re­sort, I hauled out ev­ery­thing I could re­mem­ber from my early school­days, and I tried to nar­rate our ad­ven­tures in Latin. Cicero would have plugged his ears and sent me to the scullery, but some­how I man­aged to pull through. With the same neg­a­tive re­sult.</p>
				<p>This last at­tempt ul­ti­mately mis­fir­ing, the two strangers ex­changed a few words in their in­com­pre­hen­si­ble lan­guage and with­drew, not even fa­vor­ing us with one of those en­cour­ag­ing ges­tures that are used in ev­ery coun­try in the world. The door closed again.</p>
				<p>“This is out­ra­geous!” Ned Land shouted, ex­plod­ing for the twen­ti­eth time. “I ask you! We speak French, English, Ger­man, and Latin to these rogues, and nei­ther of them has the de­cency to even an­swer back!”</p>
				<p>“Calm down, Ned,” I told the seething har­pooner. “Anger won’t get us any­where.”</p>
				<p>“But pro­fes­sor,” our iras­ci­ble com­pan­ion went on, “can’t you see that we could die of hunger in this iron cage?”</p>
				<p>“Bah!” Con­seil put in philo­soph­i­cally. “We can hold out a good while yet!”</p>
				<p>“My friends,” I said, “we mustn’t de­spair. We’ve got­ten out of tighter spots. So please do me the fa­vor of wait­ing a bit be­fore you form your views on the com­man­der and crew of this boat.”</p>
				<p>“My views are fully formed,” Ned Land shot back. “They’re rogues!”</p>
				<p>“Oh good! And from what coun­try?”</p>
				<p>“Rogue­dom!”</p>
				<p>“My gal­lant Ned, as yet that coun­try isn’t clearly marked on maps of the world, but I ad­mit that the na­tion­al­ity of these two strangers is hard to make out! Nei­ther English, French, nor Ger­man, that’s all we can say. But I’m tempted to think that the com­man­der and his chief of­fi­cer were born in the low lat­i­tudes. There must be south­ern blood in them. But as to whether they’re Spa­niards, Turks, Arabs, or East In­di­ans, their phys­i­cal char­ac­ter­is­tics don’t give me enough to go on. And as for their speech, it’s ut­terly in­com­pre­hen­si­ble.”</p>
				<p>“That’s the nui­sance in not know­ing ev­ery lan­guage,” Con­seil replied, “or the draw­back in not hav­ing one uni­ver­sal lan­guage!”</p>
				<p>“Which would all go out the win­dow!” Ned Land replied. “Don’t you see, these peo­ple have a lan­guage all to them­selves, a lan­guage they’ve in­vented just to cause de­spair in de­cent peo­ple who ask for a lit­tle din­ner! Why, in ev­ery coun­try on earth, when you open your mouth, snap your jaws, smack your lips and teeth, isn’t that the world’s most un­der­stand­able mes­sage? From Que­bec to the Tuamotu Is­lands, from Paris to the An­tipodes, doesn’t it mean: I’m hun­gry, give me a bite to eat!”</p>
				<p>“Oh,” Con­seil put in, “there are some peo­ple so un­in­tel­li­gent by na­ture …”</p>
				<p>As he was say­ing these words, the door opened. A stew­ard en­tered.<a class="epub-type-noteref" href="../text/endnotes.xhtml#note-6" id="note-6" epub:type="noteref">6</a> He brought us some clothes, jack­ets and sailor’s pants, made out of a fab­ric whose na­ture I didn’t rec­og­nize. I hur­ried to change into them, and my com­pan­ions fol­lowed suit.</p>
				<p>Mean­while our silent stew­ard, per­haps a deaf-mute, set the ta­ble and laid three place set­tings.</p>
				<p>“There’s some­thing se­ri­ous afoot,” Con­seil said, “and it bodes well.”</p>
				<p>“Bah!” replied the ran­corous har­pooner. “What the devil do you sup­pose they eat around here? Tur­tle liv­ers, loin of shark, dog­fish steaks?”</p>
				<p>“We’ll soon find out!” Con­seil said.</p>
				<p>Over­laid with sil­ver dish cov­ers, var­i­ous plat­ters had been neatly po­si­tioned on the ta­ble cloth, and we sat down to eat. As­suredly, we were deal­ing with civ­i­lized peo­ple, and if it hadn’t been for this elec­tric light flood­ing over us, I would have thought we were in the din­ing room of the Ho­tel Adel­phi in Liver­pool, or the Grand Ho­tel in Paris. How­ever, I feel com­pelled to men­tion that bread and wine were to­tally ab­sent. The wa­ter was fresh and clear, but it was still wa­ter—which wasn’t what Ned Land had in mind. Among the foods we were served, I was able to iden­tify var­i­ous dain­tily dressed fish; but I couldn’t make up my mind about cer­tain oth­er­wise ex­cel­lent dishes, and I couldn’t even tell whether their con­tents be­longed to the veg­etable or the an­i­mal king­dom. As for the table­ware, it was el­e­gant and in per­fect taste. Each uten­sil, spoon, fork, knife, and plate, bore on its re­verse a let­ter en­cir­cled by a Latin motto, and here is its ex­act du­pli­cate:</p>
				<blockquote class="inscription">
					<p class="first-child" lang="la" xml:lang="la">Mo­bilis In Mo­bili</p>
					<p>N</p>
				</blockquote>
				<p>Mov­ing within the mov­ing el­e­ment! It was a highly ap­pro­pri­ate motto for this un­der­wa­ter ma­chine, so long as the prepo­si­tion “in” is trans­lated as “within” and not “upon.” The let­ter N was no doubt the ini­tial of the name of that mys­ti­fy­ing in­di­vid­ual in com­mand be­neath the seas!</p>
				<p>Ned and Con­seil had no time for such mus­ings. They were wolf­ing down their food, and with­out fur­ther ado I did the same. By now I felt re­as­sured about our fate, and it seemed ob­vi­ous that our hosts didn’t in­tend to let us die of star­va­tion.</p>
				<p>But all earthly things come to an end, all things must pass, even the hunger of peo­ple who haven’t eaten for fif­teen hours. Our ap­petites ap­peased, we felt an ur­gent need for sleep. A nat­u­ral re­ac­tion af­ter that in­ter­minable night of fight­ing for our lives.</p>
				<p>“Ye gods, I’ll sleep soundly,” Con­seil said.</p>
				<p>“Me, I’m out like a light!” Ned Land replied.</p>
				<p>My two com­pan­ions lay down on the cabin’s car­pet­ing and were soon deep in slum­ber.</p>
				<p>As for me, I gave in less read­ily to this in­tense need for sleep. Too many thoughts had piled up in my mind, too many in­sol­u­ble ques­tions had arisen, too many im­ages were keep­ing my eye­lids open! Where were we? What strange power was car­ry­ing us along? I felt—or at least I thought I did—the sub­mersible sink­ing to­ward the sea’s lower strata. In­tense night­mares be­sieged me. In these mys­te­ri­ous ma­rine sanc­tu­ar­ies, I en­vi­sioned hosts of un­known an­i­mals, and this un­der­wa­ter boat seemed to be a blood re­la­tion of theirs: liv­ing, breath­ing, just as fear­some … ! Then my mind grew calmer, my imag­i­na­tion melted into hazy drowsi­ness, and I soon fell into an un­easy slum­ber.</p>
			</section>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
