<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="en-US" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: http://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Chapter 16</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="part-2" epub:type="part">
			<section id="chapter-2-16" epub:type="chapter">
				<h3 epub:type="title">
					<span class="first-child" epub:type="z3998:roman">XVI</span>
					<span class="epub-type-subtitle" epub:type="subtitle">Shortage of Air</span>
				</h3>
				<p>Con­se­quently, above, be­low, and around the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i>, there were im­pen­e­tra­ble frozen walls. We were the Ice Bank’s pris­on­ers! The Cana­dian banged a ta­ble with his fear­some fist. Con­seil kept still. I stared at the cap­tain. His face had re­sumed its usual emo­tion­less­ness. He crossed his arms. He pon­dered. The <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i> did not stir.</p>
				<p>The cap­tain then broke into speech:</p>
				<p>“Gentle­men,” he said in a calm voice, “there are two ways of dy­ing un­der the con­di­tions in which we’re placed.”</p>
				<p>This in­ex­pli­ca­ble in­di­vid­ual acted like a math­e­mat­ics pro­fes­sor work­ing out a prob­lem for his pupils.</p>
				<p>“The first way,” he went on, “is death by crush­ing. The sec­ond is death by as­phyx­i­a­tion. I don’t men­tion the pos­si­bil­ity of death by star­va­tion be­cause the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i>’s pro­vi­sions will cer­tainly last longer than we will. There­fore, let’s con­cen­trate on our chances of be­ing crushed or as­phyx­i­ated.”</p>
				<p>“As for as­phyx­i­a­tion, cap­tain,” I replied, “that isn’t a cause for alarm, be­cause the air tanks are full.”</p>
				<p>“True,” Cap­tain Nemo went on, “but they’ll sup­ply air for only two days. Now then, we’ve been buried be­neath the wa­ters for thirty-six hours, and the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i>’s heavy at­mos­phere al­ready needs re­new­ing. In an­other forty-eight hours, our re­serve air will be used up.”</p>
				<p>“Well then, cap­tain, let’s free our­selves within forty-eight hours!”</p>
				<p>“We’ll try to at least, by cut­ting through one of these walls sur­round­ing us.”</p>
				<p>“Which one?” I asked.</p>
				<p>“Bor­ings will tell us that. I’m go­ing to ground the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i> on the lower shelf, then my men will put on their div­ing suits and at­tack the thinnest of these ice walls.”</p>
				<p>“Can the pan­els in the lounge be left open?”</p>
				<p>“Without ill ef­fect. We’re no longer in mo­tion.”</p>
				<p>Cap­tain Nemo went out. Hiss­ing sounds soon told me that wa­ter was be­ing ad­mit­ted into the bal­last tanks. The <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i> slowly set­tled and rested on the icy bot­tom at a depth of 350 me­ters, the depth at which the lower shelf of ice lay sub­merged.</p>
				<p>“My friends,” I said, “we’re in a se­ri­ous predica­ment, but I’m count­ing on your courage and en­ergy.”</p>
				<p>“Sir,” the Cana­dian replied, “this is no time to bore you with my com­plaints. I’m ready to do any­thing I can for the com­mon good.”</p>
				<p>“Ex­cel­lent, Ned,” I said, ex­tend­ing my hand to the Cana­dian.</p>
				<p>“I might add,” he went on, “that I’m as handy with a pick as a har­poon. If I can be help­ful to the cap­tain, he can use me any way he wants.”</p>
				<p>“He won’t turn down your as­sis­tance. Come along, Ned.”</p>
				<p>I led the Cana­dian to the room where the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i>’s men were putting on their div­ing suits. I in­formed the cap­tain of Ned’s propo­si­tion, which was promptly ac­cepted. The Cana­dian got into his un­der­wa­ter cos­tume and was ready as soon as his fel­low work­ers. Each of them car­ried on his back a Rouquay­rol de­vice that the air tanks had sup­plied with a gen­er­ous al­lowance of fresh oxy­gen. A con­sid­er­able but nec­es­sary drain on the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i>’s re­serves. As for the Ruhmko­rff lamps, they were un­nec­es­sary in the midst of these bril­liant wa­ters sat­u­rated with our elec­tric rays.</p>
				<p>After Ned was dressed, I reen­tered the lounge, whose win­dows had been un­cov­ered; sta­tioned next to Con­seil, I ex­am­ined the strata sur­round­ing and sup­port­ing the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i>.</p>
				<p>Some mo­ments later, we saw a dozen crew­men set foot on the shelf of ice, among them Ned Land, eas­ily rec­og­nized by his tall fig­ure. Cap­tain Nemo was with them.</p>
				<p>Be­fore dig­ging into the ice, the cap­tain had to ob­tain bor­ings, to in­sure work­ing in the best di­rec­tion. Long bores were driven into the side walls; but af­ter fif­teen me­ters, the in­stru­ments were still im­peded by the thick­ness of those walls. It was fu­tile to at­tack the ceil­ing since that sur­face was the Ice Bank it­self, more than 400 me­ters high. Cap­tain Nemo then bored into the lower sur­face. There we were sep­a­rated from the sea by a ten-me­ter bar­rier. That’s how thick the ice­berg was. From this point on, it was an is­sue of cut­ting out a piece equal in sur­face area to the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i>’s wa­ter­line. This meant de­tach­ing about 6,500 cu­bic me­ters, to dig a hole through which the ship could de­scend be­low this tract of ice.</p>
				<p>Work be­gan im­me­di­ately and was car­ried on with tire­less tenac­ity. In­stead of dig­ging all around the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i>, which would have en­tailed even greater dif­fi­cul­ties, Cap­tain Nemo had an im­mense trench out­lined on the ice, eight me­ters from our port quar­ter. Then his men si­mul­ta­ne­ously staked it off at sev­eral points around its cir­cum­fer­ence. Soon their picks were vig­or­ously at­tack­ing this com­pact mat­ter, and huge chunks were loos­ened from its mass. Th­ese chunks weighed less than the wa­ter, and by an un­usual ef­fect of spe­cific grav­ity, each chunk took wing, as it were, to the roof of the tun­nel, which thick­ened above by as much as it di­min­ished be­low. But this hardly mat­tered so long as the lower sur­face kept grow­ing thin­ner.</p>
				<p>After two hours of en­er­getic work, Ned Land reen­tered, ex­hausted. He and his com­pan­ions were re­placed by new work­men, in­clud­ing Con­seil and me. The <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i>’s chief of­fi­cer su­per­vised us.</p>
				<p>The wa­ter struck me as un­usu­ally cold, but I warmed up promptly while wield­ing my pick. My move­ments were quite free, al­though they were ex­e­cuted un­der a pres­sure of thirty at­mos­pheres.</p>
				<p>After two hours of work, reen­ter­ing to snatch some food and rest, I found a no­tice­able dif­fer­ence be­tween the clean elas­tic fluid sup­plied me by the Rouquay­rol de­vice and the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i>’s at­mos­phere, which was al­ready charged with car­bon diox­ide. The air hadn’t been re­newed in forty-eight hours, and its life-giv­ing qual­i­ties were con­sid­er­ably weak­ened. Mean­while, af­ter twelve hours had gone by, we had re­moved from the out­lined sur­face area a slice of ice only one me­ter thick, hence about 600 cu­bic me­ters. As­sum­ing the same work would be ac­com­plished ev­ery twelve hours, it would still take five nights and four days to see the un­der­tak­ing through to com­ple­tion.</p>
				<p>“Five nights and four days!” I told my com­pan­ions. “And we have oxy­gen in the air tanks for only two days.”</p>
				<p>“Without tak­ing into ac­count,” Ned an­swered, “that once we’re out of this damned prison, we’ll still be cooped up be­neath the Ice Bank, with­out any pos­si­ble con­tact with the open air!”</p>
				<p>An apt re­mark. For who could pre­dict the min­i­mum time we would need to free our­selves? Be­fore the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i> could re­turn to the sur­face of the waves, couldn’t we all die of as­phyx­i­a­tion? Were this ship and ev­ery­one on board doomed to per­ish in this tomb of ice? It was a dread­ful state of af­fairs. But we faced it head-on, each one of us de­ter­mined to do his duty to the end.</p>
				<p>Dur­ing the night, in line with my fore­casts, a new one-me­ter slice was re­moved from this im­mense socket. But in the morn­ing, wear­ing my div­ing suit, I was cross­ing through the liq­uid mass in a tem­per­a­ture of −6° to −7° centi­grade, when I noted that lit­tle by lit­tle the side walls were clos­ing in on each other. The liq­uid strata far­thest from the trench, not warmed by the move­ments of work­men and tools, were show­ing a ten­dency to so­lid­ify. In the face of this im­mi­nent new dan­ger, what would hap­pen to our chances for sal­va­tion, and how could we pre­vent this liq­uid medium from so­lid­i­fy­ing, then crack­ing the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i>’s hull like glass?</p>
				<p>I didn’t tell my two com­pan­ions about this new dan­ger. There was no point in damp­en­ing the en­ergy they were putting into our ar­du­ous res­cue work. But when I re­turned on board, I men­tioned this se­ri­ous com­pli­ca­tion to Cap­tain Nemo.</p>
				<p>“I know,” he told me in that calm tone the most dread­ful out­look couldn’t change. “It’s one more dan­ger, but I don’t know any way of ward­ing it off. Our sole chance for sal­va­tion is to work faster than the wa­ter so­lid­i­fies. We’ve got to get there first, that’s all.”</p>
				<p>Get there first! By then I should have been used to this type of talk!</p>
				<p>For sev­eral hours that day, I wielded my pick doggedly. The work kept me go­ing. Be­sides, work­ing meant leav­ing the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i>, which meant breath­ing the clean oxy­gen drawn from the air tanks and sup­plied by our equip­ment, which meant leav­ing the thin, foul air be­hind.</p>
				<p>Near evening one more me­ter had been dug from the trench. When I re­turned on board, I was well-nigh as­phyx­i­ated by the car­bon diox­ide sat­u­rat­ing the air. Oh, if only we had the chem­i­cal meth­ods that would en­able us to drive out this nox­ious gas! There was no lack of oxy­gen. All this wa­ter con­tained a con­sid­er­able amount, and af­ter it was de­com­posed by our pow­er­ful bat­ter­ies, this life-giv­ing elas­tic fluid could have been re­stored to us. I had thought it all out, but to no avail be­cause the car­bon diox­ide pro­duced by our breath­ing per­me­ated ev­ery part of the ship. To ab­sorb it, we would need to fill con­tain­ers with potas­sium hy­drox­ide and shake them con­tin­u­ally. But this sub­stance was miss­ing on board and noth­ing else could re­place it.</p>
				<p>That evening Cap­tain Nemo was forced to open the spig­ots of his air tanks and shoot a few spouts of fresh oxy­gen through the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i>’s in­te­rior. Without this pre­cau­tion we wouldn’t have awak­ened the fol­low­ing morn­ing.</p>
				<p>The next day, March 26, I re­turned to my miner’s trade, work­ing to re­move the fifth me­ter. The Ice Bank’s side walls and un­der­belly had vis­i­bly thick­ened. Ob­vi­ously they would come to­gether be­fore the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i> could break free. For an in­stant I was gripped by de­spair. My pick nearly slipped from my hands. What was the point of this dig­ging if I was to die smoth­ered and crushed by this wa­ter turn­ing to stone, a tor­ture un­dreamed of by even the wildest sav­ages! I felt like I was ly­ing in the jaws of a fear­some mon­ster, jaws ir­re­sistibly clos­ing.</p>
				<p>Su­per­vis­ing our work, work­ing him­self, Cap­tain Nemo passed near me just then. I touched him with my hand and pointed to the walls of our prison. The star­board wall had moved for­ward to a point less than four me­ters from the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i>’s hull.</p>
				<p>The cap­tain un­der­stood and gave me a sig­nal to fol­low him. We re­turned on board. My div­ing suit re­moved, I went with him to the lounge.</p>
				<p>“Pro­fes­sor Aron­nax,” he told me, “this calls for heroic mea­sures, or we’ll be sealed up in this so­lid­i­fied wa­ter as if it were ce­ment.”</p>
				<p>“Yes!” I said. “But what can we do?”</p>
				<p>“Oh,” he ex­claimed, “if only my <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i> were strong enough to stand that much pres­sure with­out be­ing crushed!”</p>
				<p>“Well?” I asked, not catch­ing the cap­tain’s mean­ing.</p>
				<p>“Don’t you un­der­stand,” he went on, “that the con­geal­ing of this wa­ter could come to our res­cue? Don’t you see that by so­lid­i­fy­ing, it could burst these tracts of ice im­pris­on­ing us, just as its freez­ing can burst the hard­est stones? Aren’t you aware that this force could be the in­stru­ment of our sal­va­tion rather than our de­struc­tion?”</p>
				<p>“Yes, cap­tain, maybe so. But what­ever re­sis­tance to crush­ing the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i> may have, it still couldn’t stand such dread­ful pres­sures, and it would be squashed as flat as a piece of sheet iron.”</p>
				<p>“I know it, sir. So we can’t rely on na­ture to res­cue us, only our own ef­forts. We must coun­ter­act this so­lid­i­fi­ca­tion. We must hold it in check. Not only are the side walls clos­ing in, but there aren’t ten feet of wa­ter ahead or astern of the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i>. All around us, this freeze is gain­ing fast.”</p>
				<p>“How long,” I asked, “will the oxy­gen in the air tanks en­able us to breathe on board?”</p>
				<p>The cap­tain looked me straight in the eye.</p>
				<p>“After to­mor­row,” he said, “the air tanks will be empty!”</p>
				<p>I broke out in a cold sweat. But why should I have been star­tled by this re­ply? On March 22 the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i> had dived un­der the open wa­ters at the pole. It was now the 26th. We had lived off the ship’s stores for five days! And all re­main­ing breath­able air had to be saved for the work­men. Even to­day as I write these lines, my sen­sa­tions are so in­tense that an in­vol­un­tary ter­ror sweeps over me, and my lungs still seem short of air!</p>
				<p>Mean­while, mo­tion­less and silent, Cap­tain Nemo stood lost in thought. An idea vis­i­bly crossed his mind. But he seemed to brush it aside. He told him­self no. At last these words es­caped his lips:</p>
				<p>“Boil­ing wa­ter!” he mut­tered.</p>
				<p>“Boil­ing wa­ter?” I ex­claimed.</p>
				<p>“Yes, sir. We’re shut up in a rel­a­tively con­fined area. If the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i>’s pumps con­tin­u­ally in­jected streams of boil­ing wa­ter into this space, wouldn’t that raise its tem­per­a­ture and de­lay its freez­ing?”</p>
				<p>“It’s worth try­ing!” I said res­o­lutely.</p>
				<p>“So let’s try it, pro­fes­sor.”</p>
				<p>By then the ther­mome­ter gave −7° centi­grade out­side. Cap­tain Nemo led me to the gal­ley where a huge dis­till­ing mech­a­nism was at work, sup­ply­ing drink­ing wa­ter via evap­o­ra­tion. The mech­a­nism was loaded with wa­ter, and the full elec­tric heat of our bat­ter­ies was thrown into coils awash in liq­uid. In a few min­utes the wa­ter reached 100° centi­grade. It was sent to the pumps while new wa­ter re­placed it in the process. The heat gen­er­ated by our bat­ter­ies was so in­tense that af­ter sim­ply go­ing through the mech­a­nism, wa­ter drawn cold from the sea ar­rived boil­ing hot at the body of the pump.</p>
				<p>The steam­ing wa­ter was in­jected into the icy wa­ter out­side, and af­ter three hours had passed, the ther­mome­ter gave the ex­te­rior tem­per­a­ture as −6° centi­grade. That was one de­gree gained. Two hours later the ther­mome­ter gave only −4°.</p>
				<p>After I mon­i­tored the op­er­a­tion’s progress, dou­ble-check­ing it with many in­spec­tions, I told the cap­tain, “It’s work­ing.”</p>
				<p>“I think so,” he an­swered me. “We’ve es­caped be­ing crushed. Now we have only as­phyx­i­a­tion to fear.”</p>
				<p>Dur­ing the night the wa­ter tem­per­a­ture rose to −1° centi­grade. The in­jec­tions couldn’t get it to go a sin­gle de­gree higher. But since salt wa­ter freezes only at −2°, I was fi­nally as­sured that there was no dan­ger of it so­lid­i­fy­ing.</p>
				<p>By the next day, March 27, six me­ters of ice had been torn from the socket. Only four me­ters were left to be re­moved. That still meant forty-eight hours of work. The air couldn’t be re­newed in the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i>’s in­te­rior. Ac­cord­ingly, that day it kept get­ting worse.</p>
				<p>An un­bear­able heav­i­ness weighed me down. Near three o’clock in the af­ter­noon, this ag­o­niz­ing sen­sa­tion af­fected me to an in­tense de­gree. Yawns dis­lo­cated my jaws. My lungs were gasp­ing in their quest for that enkin­dling elas­tic fluid re­quired for breath­ing, now grow­ing scarcer and scarcer. My mind was in a daze. I lay out­stretched, strength gone, nearly un­con­scious. My gal­lant Con­seil felt the same symp­toms, suf­fered the same suf­fer­ings, yet never left my side. He held my hand, he kept en­cour­ag­ing me, and I even heard him mut­ter:</p>
				<p>“Oh, if only I didn’t have to breathe, to leave more air for mas­ter!”</p>
				<p>It brought tears to my eyes to hear him say these words.</p>
				<p>Since con­di­tions in­side were uni­ver­sally un­bear­able, how ea­gerly, how hap­pily, we put on our div­ing suits to take our turns work­ing! Picks rang out on that bed of ice. Arms grew weary, hands were rubbed raw, but who cared about ex­haus­tion, what dif­fer­ence were wounds? Life-sus­tain­ing air reached our lungs! We could breathe! We could breathe!</p>
				<p>And yet no­body pro­longed his un­der­wa­ter work be­yond the time al­lot­ted him. His shift over, each man sur­ren­dered to a gasp­ing com­pan­ion the air tank that would re­vive him. Cap­tain Nemo set the ex­am­ple and was fore­most in sub­mit­ting to this strict dis­ci­pline. When his time was up, he yielded his equip­ment to an­other and reen­tered the foul air on board, al­ways calm, un­flinch­ing, and un­com­plain­ing.</p>
				<p>That day the usual work was ac­com­plished with even greater en­ergy. Over the whole sur­face area, only two me­ters were left to be re­moved. Only two me­ters sep­a­rated us from the open sea. But the ship’s air tanks were nearly empty. The lit­tle air that re­mained had to be saved for the work­men. Not an atom for the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i>!</p>
				<p>When I re­turned on board, I felt half suf­fo­cated. What a night! I’m un­able to de­pict it. Such suf­fer­ings are in­de­scrib­able. The next day I was short-winded. Headaches and stag­ger­ing fits of dizzi­ness made me reel like a drunk. My com­pan­ions were ex­pe­ri­enc­ing the same symp­toms. Some crew­men were at their last gasp.</p>
				<p>That day, the sixth of our im­pris­on­ment, Cap­tain Nemo con­cluded that picks and mat­tocks were too slow to deal with the ice layer still sep­a­rat­ing us from open wa­ter—and he de­cided to crush this layer. The man had kept his en­ergy and com­po­sure. He had sub­dued phys­i­cal pain with moral strength. He could still think, plan, and act.</p>
				<p>At his or­ders the craft was eased off, in other words, it was raised from its icy bed by a change in its spe­cific grav­ity. When it was afloat, the crew towed it, lead­ing it right above the im­mense trench out­lined to match the ship’s wa­ter­line. Next the bal­last tanks filled with wa­ter, the boat sank, and was fit­ted into its socket.</p>
				<p>Just then the whole crew re­turned on board, and the dou­ble out­side door was closed. By this point the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i> was rest­ing on a bed of ice only one me­ter thick and drilled by bores in a thou­sand places.</p>
				<p>The stop­cocks of the bal­last tanks were then opened wide, and 100 cu­bic me­ters of wa­ter rushed in, in­creas­ing the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i>’s weight by 100,000 kilo­grams.</p>
				<p>We waited, we lis­tened, we for­got our suf­fer­ings, we hoped once more. We had staked our sal­va­tion on this one last gam­ble.</p>
				<p>De­spite the buzzing in my head, I soon could hear vi­bra­tions un­der the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i>’s hull. We tilted. The ice cracked with an odd rip­ping sound, like pa­per tear­ing, and the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i> be­gan set­tling down­ward.</p>
				<p>“We’re go­ing through!” Con­seil mut­tered in my ear.</p>
				<p>I couldn’t an­swer him. I clutched his hand. I squeezed it in an in­vol­un­tary con­vul­sion.</p>
				<p>All at once, car­ried away by its fright­ful ex­cess load, the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i> sank into the wa­ters like a can­non­ball, in other words, drop­ping as if in a vac­uum!</p>
				<p>Our full elec­tric power was then put on the pumps, which in­stantly be­gan to ex­pel wa­ter from the bal­last tanks. After a few min­utes we had checked our fall. The pres­sure gauge soon in­di­cated an as­cend­ing move­ment. Brought to full speed, the pro­pel­ler made the sheet-iron hull trem­ble down to its riv­ets, and we sped north­ward.</p>
				<p>But how long would it take to nav­i­gate un­der the Ice Bank to the open sea? Another day? I would be dead first!</p>
				<p>Half ly­ing on a couch in the li­brary, I was suf­fo­cat­ing. My face was pur­ple, my lips blue, my fac­ul­ties in abeyance. I could no longer see or hear. I had lost all sense of time. My mus­cles had no power to con­tract.</p>
				<p>I’m un­able to es­ti­mate the hours that passed in this way. But I was aware that my death throes had be­gun. I re­al­ized that I was about to die …</p>
				<p>Sud­denly I re­gained con­scious­ness. A few whiffs of air had en­tered my lungs. Had we risen to the sur­face of the waves? Had we cleared the Ice Bank?</p>
				<p>No! Ned and Con­seil, my two gal­lant friends, were sac­ri­fic­ing them­selves to save me. A few atoms of air were still left in the depths of one Rouquay­rol de­vice. In­stead of breath­ing it them­selves, they had saved it for me, and while they were suf­fo­cat­ing, they poured life into me drop by drop! I tried to push the de­vice away. They held my hands, and for a few mo­ments I could breathe lux­u­ri­ously.</p>
				<p>My eyes flew to­ward the clock. It was eleven in the morn­ing. It had to be March 28. The <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i> was trav­el­ing at the fright­ful speed of forty miles per hour. It was writhing in the wa­ters.</p>
				<p>Where was Cap­tain Nemo? Had he per­ished? Had his com­pan­ions died with him?</p>
				<p>Just then the pres­sure gauge in­di­cated we were no more than twenty feet from the sur­face. Separat­ing us from the open air was a mere tract of ice. Could we break through it?</p>
				<p>Per­haps! In any event the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i> was go­ing to try. In fact, I could feel it as­sum­ing an oblique po­si­tion, low­er­ing its stern and rais­ing its spur. The ad­mis­sion of ad­di­tional wa­ter was enough to shift its bal­ance. Then, driven by its pow­er­ful pro­pel­ler, it at­tacked this ice field from be­low like a fear­some bat­ter­ing ram. It split the bar­rier lit­tle by lit­tle, back­ing up, then putting on full speed against the punc­tured tract of ice; and fi­nally, car­ried away by its supreme mo­men­tum, it lunged through and onto this frozen sur­face, crush­ing the ice be­neath its weight.</p>
				<p>The hatches were opened—or torn off, if you pre­fer—and waves of clean air were ad­mit­ted into ev­ery part of the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i>.</p>
			</section>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
