<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="en-US" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: http://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Chapter 9</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="part-1" epub:type="part">
			<section id="chapter-1-9" epub:type="chapter">
				<h3 epub:type="title">
					<span class="first-child" epub:type="z3998:roman">IX</span>
					<span class="epub-type-subtitle" epub:type="subtitle">The Tantrums of Ned Land</span>
				</h3>
				<p>I have no idea how long this slum­ber lasted; but it must have been a good while, since we were com­pletely over our ex­haus­tion. I was the first one to wake up. My com­pan­ions weren’t yet stir­ring and still lay in their cor­ners like inan­i­mate ob­jects.</p>
				<p>I had barely got­ten up from my pass­ably hard mat­tress when I felt my mind clear, my brain go on the alert. So I be­gan a care­ful re­ex­am­i­na­tion of our cell.</p>
				<p>Noth­ing had changed in its in­te­rior ar­range­ments. The prison was still a prison and its pris­on­ers still pris­on­ers. But, tak­ing ad­van­tage of our slum­ber, the stew­ard had cleared the ta­ble. Con­se­quently, noth­ing in­di­cated any forth­com­ing im­prove­ment in our sit­u­a­tion, and I se­ri­ously won­dered if we were doomed to spend the rest of our lives in this cage.</p>
				<p>This prospect seemed in­creas­ingly painful to me be­cause, even though my brain was clear of its ob­ses­sions from the night be­fore, I was feel­ing an odd short-wind­ed­ness in my chest. It was be­com­ing hard for me to breathe. The heavy air was no longer suf­fi­cient for the full play of my lungs. Although our cell was large, we ob­vi­ously had used up most of the oxy­gen it con­tained. In essence, over an hour’s time a sin­gle hu­man be­ing con­sumes all the oxy­gen found in 100 liters of air, at which point that air has be­come charged with a nearly equal amount of car­bon diox­ide and is no longer fit for breath­ing.</p>
				<p>So it was now ur­gent to re­new the air in our prison, and no doubt the air in this whole un­der­wa­ter boat as well.</p>
				<p>Here a ques­tion popped into my head. How did the com­man­der of this aquatic res­i­dence go about it? Did he ob­tain air us­ing chem­i­cal meth­ods, re­leas­ing the oxy­gen con­tained in potas­sium chlo­rate by heat­ing it, mean­while ab­sorb­ing the car­bon diox­ide with potas­sium hy­drox­ide? If so, he would have to keep up some kind of re­la­tion­ship with the shore, to come by the ma­te­ri­als needed for such an op­er­a­tion. Did he sim­ply limit him­self to stor­ing the air in high-pres­sure tanks and then dis­pense it ac­cord­ing to his crew’s needs? Per­haps. Or, pro­ceed­ing in a more con­ve­nient, more eco­nom­i­cal, and con­se­quently more prob­a­ble fash­ion, was he sat­is­fied with merely re­turn­ing to breathe at the sur­face of the wa­ter like a cetacean, re­new­ing his oxy­gen sup­ply ev­ery twenty-four hours? In any event, what­ever his method was, it seemed pru­dent to me that he use this method with­out de­lay.</p>
				<p>In fact, I had al­ready re­sorted to speed­ing up my in­hala­tions in or­der to ex­tract from the cell what lit­tle oxy­gen it con­tained, when sud­denly I was re­freshed by a cur­rent of clean air, scented with a salty aroma. It had to be a sea breeze, life-giv­ing and charged with io­dine! I opened my mouth wide, and my lungs glut­ted them­selves on the fresh par­ti­cles. At the same time, I felt a sway­ing, a rolling of mod­er­ate mag­ni­tude but def­i­nitely no­tice­able. This boat, this sheet-iron mon­ster, had ob­vi­ously just risen to the sur­face of the ocean, there to breathe in good whale fash­ion. So the ship’s mode of ven­ti­la­tion was fi­nally es­tab­lished.</p>
				<p>When I had ab­sorbed a chest­ful of this clean air, I looked for the con­duit—the “air car­rier,” if you pre­fer—that al­lowed this ben­e­fi­cial in­flux to reach us, and I soon found it. Above the door opened an air vent that let in a fresh cur­rent of oxy­gen, re­new­ing the thin air in our cell.</p>
				<p>I had got­ten to this point in my ob­ser­va­tions when Ned and Con­seil woke up al­most si­mul­ta­ne­ously, un­der the in­flu­ence of this re­viv­ing air pu­rifi­ca­tion. They rubbed their eyes, stretched their arms, and sprang to their feet.</p>
				<p>“Did mas­ter sleep well?” Con­seil asked me with his peren­nial good man­ners.</p>
				<p>“Ex­tremely well, my gal­lant lad,” I replied. “And how about you, Mr. Ned Land?”</p>
				<p>“Like a log, pro­fes­sor. But I must be imag­in­ing things, be­cause it seems like I’m breath­ing a sea breeze!”</p>
				<p>A sea­man couldn’t be wrong on this topic, and I told the Cana­dian what had gone on while he slept.</p>
				<p>“Good!” he said. “That ex­plains per­fectly all that bel­low­ing we heard, when our so-called nar­whale lay in sight of the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Abra­ham Lin­coln</i>.”</p>
				<p>“Per­fectly, Mr. Land. It was catch­ing its breath!”</p>
				<p>“Only I’ve no idea what time it is, Pro­fes­sor Aron­nax, un­less maybe it’s din­ner­time?”</p>
				<p>“Din­ner­time, my fine har­pooner? I’d say at least break­fast time, be­cause we’ve cer­tainly wo­ken up to a new day.”</p>
				<p>“Which in­di­cates,” Con­seil replied, “that we’ve spent twenty-four hours in slum­ber.”</p>
				<p>“That’s my as­sess­ment,” I replied.</p>
				<p>“I won’t ar­gue with you,” Ned Land an­swered. “But din­ner or break­fast, that stew­ard will be plenty wel­come whether he brings the one or the other.”</p>
				<p>“The one and the other,” Con­seil said.</p>
				<p>“Well put,” the Cana­dian replied. “We de­serve two meals, and speak­ing for my­self, I’ll do jus­tice to them both.”</p>
				<p>“All right, Ned, let’s wait and see!” I replied. “It’s clear that these strangers don’t in­tend to let us die of hunger, oth­er­wise last evening’s din­ner wouldn’t make any sense.”</p>
				<p>“Un­less they’re fat­ten­ing us up!” Ned shot back.</p>
				<p>“I ob­ject,” I replied. “We have not fallen into the hands of can­ni­bals.”</p>
				<p>“Just be­cause they don’t make a habit of it,” the Cana­dian replied in all se­ri­ous­ness, “doesn’t mean they don’t in­dulge from time to time. Who knows? Maybe these peo­ple have gone with­out fresh meat for a long while, and in that case three healthy, well-built spec­i­mens like the pro­fes­sor, his manser­vant, and me—”</p>
				<p>“Get rid of those ideas, Mr. Land,” I an­swered the har­pooner. “And above all, don’t let them lead you to flare up against our hosts, which would only make our sit­u­a­tion worse.”</p>
				<p>“Any­how,” the har­pooner said, “I’m as hun­gry as all Hades, and din­ner or break­fast, not one puny meal has ar­rived!”</p>
				<p>“Mr. Land,” I an­swered, “we have to adapt to the sched­ule on board, and I imag­ine our stom­achs are run­ning ahead of the chief cook’s din­ner bell.”</p>
				<p>“Well then, we’ll ad­just our stom­achs to the chef’s timetable!” Con­seil replied serenely.</p>
				<p>“There you go again, Con­seil my friend!” the im­pa­tient Cana­dian shot back. “You never al­low your­self any dis­plays of bile or at­tacks of nerves! You’re ev­er­last­ingly calm! You’d say your af­ter-meal grace even if you didn’t get any food for your be­fore-meal bless­ing—and you’d starve to death rather than com­plain!”</p>
				<p>“What good would it do?” Con­seil asked.</p>
				<p>“Com­plain­ing doesn’t have to do good, it just feels good! And if these pi­rates—I say pi­rates out of con­sid­er­a­tion for the pro­fes­sor’s feel­ings, since he doesn’t want us to call them can­ni­bals—if these pi­rates think they’re go­ing to smother me in this cage with­out hear­ing what cuss­words spice up my out­bursts, they’ve got an­other think com­ing! Look here, Pro­fes­sor Aron­nax, speak frankly. How long do you fig­ure they’ll keep us in this iron box?”</p>
				<p>“To tell the truth, friend Land, I know lit­tle more about it than you do.”</p>
				<p>“But in a nut­shell, what do you sup­pose is go­ing on?”</p>
				<p>“My sup­po­si­tion is that sheer chance has made us privy to an im­por­tant se­cret. Now then, if the crew of this un­der­wa­ter boat have a per­sonal in­ter­est in keep­ing that se­cret, and if their per­sonal in­ter­est is more im­por­tant than the lives of three men, I be­lieve that our very ex­is­tence is in jeop­ardy. If such is not the case, then at the first avail­able op­por­tu­nity, this mon­ster that has swal­lowed us will re­turn us to the world in­hab­ited by our own kind.”</p>
				<p>“Un­less they re­cruit us to serve on the crew,” Con­seil said, “and keep us here—”</p>
				<p>“Till the mo­ment,” Ned Land an­swered, “when some frigate that’s faster or smarter than the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Abra­ham Lin­coln</i> cap­tures this den of buc­ca­neers, then hangs all of us by the neck from the tip of a main­mast yardarm!”</p>
				<p>“Well thought out, Mr. Land,” I replied. “But as yet, I don’t be­lieve we’ve been ten­dered any en­list­ment of­fers. Con­se­quently, it’s point­less to ar­gue about what tac­tics we should pur­sue in such a case. I re­peat: let’s wait, let’s be guided by events, and let’s do noth­ing, since right now there’s noth­ing we can do.”</p>
				<p>“On the con­trary, pro­fes­sor,” the har­pooner replied, not want­ing to give in. “There is some­thing we can do.”</p>
				<p>“Oh? And what, Mr. Land?”</p>
				<p>“Break out of here!”</p>
				<p>“Break­ing out of a prison on shore is dif­fi­cult enough, but with an un­der­wa­ter prison, it strikes me as com­pletely un­work­able.”</p>
				<p>“Come now, Ned my friend,” Con­seil asked, “how would you an­swer mas­ter’s ob­jec­tion? I refuse to be­lieve that an Amer­i­can is at the end of his tether.”</p>
				<p>Vis­i­bly baf­fled, the har­pooner said noth­ing. Un­der the con­di­tions in which fate had left us, it was ab­so­lutely im­pos­si­ble to es­cape. But a Cana­dian’s wit is half French, and Mr. Ned Land made this clear in his re­ply.</p>
				<p>“So, Pro­fes­sor Aron­nax,” he went on af­ter think­ing for a few mo­ments, “you haven’t fig­ured out what peo­ple do when they can’t es­cape from their prison?”</p>
				<p>“No, my friend.”</p>
				<p>“Easy. They fix things so they stay there.”</p>
				<p>“Of course!” Con­seil put in. “Since we’re deep in the ocean, be­ing in­side this boat is vastly prefer­able to be­ing above it or be­low it!”</p>
				<p>“But we fix things by kick­ing out all the jail­ers, guards, and war­dens,” Ned Land added.</p>
				<p>“What’s this, Ned?” I asked. “You’d se­ri­ously con­sider tak­ing over this craft?”</p>
				<p>“Very se­ri­ously,” the Cana­dian replied.</p>
				<p>“It’s im­pos­si­ble.”</p>
				<p>“And why is that, sir? Some promis­ing op­por­tu­nity might come up, and I don’t see what could stop us from tak­ing ad­van­tage of it. If there are only about twenty men on board this ma­chine, I don’t think they can stave off two French­men and a Cana­dian!”</p>
				<p>It seemed wiser to ac­cept the har­pooner’s propo­si­tion than to de­bate it. Ac­cord­ingly, I was con­tent to re­ply:</p>
				<p>“Let such cir­cum­stances come, Mr. Land, and we’ll see. But un­til then, I beg you to con­trol your im­pa­tience. We need to act shrewdly, and your flare­ups won’t give rise to any promis­ing op­por­tu­ni­ties. So swear to me that you’ll ac­cept our sit­u­a­tion with­out throw­ing a tantrum over it.”</p>
				<p>“I give you my word, pro­fes­sor,” Ned Land replied in an un­en­thu­si­as­tic tone. “No ve­he­ment phrases will leave my mouth, no vi­cious ges­tures will give my feel­ings away, not even when they don’t feed us on time.”</p>
				<p>“I have your word, Ned,” I an­swered the Cana­dian.</p>
				<p>Then our con­ver­sa­tion pe­tered out, and each of us with­drew into his own thoughts. For my part, de­spite the har­pooner’s con­fi­dent talk, I ad­mit that I en­ter­tained no il­lu­sions. I had no faith in those promis­ing op­por­tu­ni­ties that Ned Land men­tioned. To op­er­ate with such ef­fi­ciency, this un­der­wa­ter boat had to have a size­able crew, so if it came to a phys­i­cal con­test, we would be fac­ing an over­whelm­ing op­po­nent. Be­sides, be­fore we could do any­thing, we had to be free, and that we def­i­nitely were not. I didn’t see any way out of this sheet-iron, her­met­i­cally sealed cell. And if the strange com­man­der of this boat did have a se­cret to keep—which seemed rather likely—he would never give us free­dom of move­ment aboard his ves­sel. Now then, would he re­sort to vi­o­lence in or­der to be rid of us, or would he drop us off one day on some re­mote coast? There lay the un­known. All these hy­pothe­ses seemed ex­tremely plau­si­ble to me, and to hope for free­dom through use of force, you had to be a har­pooner.</p>
				<p>I re­al­ized, more­over, that Ned Land’s brood­ing was get­ting him mad­der by the minute. Lit­tle by lit­tle, I heard those afore­said cuss­words welling up in the depths of his gul­let, and I saw his move­ments turn threat­en­ing again. He stood up, pac­ing in cir­cles like a wild beast in a cage, strik­ing the walls with his foot and fist. Mean­while the hours passed, our hunger nagged un­mer­ci­fully, and this time the stew­ard did not ap­pear. Which amounted to for­get­ting our cast­away sta­tus for much too long, if they re­ally had good in­ten­tions to­ward us.</p>
				<p>Tor­tured by the growl­ing of his well-built stom­ach, Ned Land was get­ting more and more riled, and de­spite his word of honor, I was in real dread of an ex­plo­sion when he stood in the pres­ence of one of the men on board.</p>
				<p>For two more hours Ned Land’s rage in­creased. The Cana­dian shouted and pleaded, but to no avail. The sheet-iron walls were deaf. I didn’t hear a sin­gle sound in­side this dead-seem­ing boat. The ves­sel hadn’t stirred, be­cause I ob­vi­ously would have felt its hull vi­brat­ing un­der the in­flu­ence of the pro­pel­ler. It had un­doubt­edly sunk into the wa­tery deep and no longer be­longed to the out­side world. All this dis­mal si­lence was ter­ri­fy­ing.</p>
				<p>As for our ne­glect, our iso­la­tion in the depths of this cell, I was afraid to guess at how long it might last. Lit­tle by lit­tle, hopes I had en­ter­tained af­ter our in­ter­view with the ship’s com­man­der were fad­ing away. The gen­tle­ness of the man’s gaze, the gen­eros­ity ex­pressed in his fa­cial fea­tures, the no­bil­ity of his bear­ing, all van­ished from my mem­ory. I saw this mys­ti­fy­ing in­di­vid­ual anew for what he in­evitably must be: cruel and mer­ci­less. I viewed him as out­side hu­man­ity, be­yond all feel­ings of com­pas­sion, the im­pla­ca­ble foe of his fel­low man, to­ward whom he must have sworn an undy­ing hate!</p>
				<p>But even so, was the man go­ing to let us die of star­va­tion, locked up in this cramped prison, ex­posed to those hor­ri­ble temp­ta­tions to which peo­ple are driven by ex­treme hunger? This grim pos­si­bil­ity took on a dread­ful in­ten­sity in my mind, and fired by my imag­i­na­tion, I felt an un­rea­son­ing ter­ror run through me. Con­seil stayed calm. Ned Land bel­lowed.</p>
				<p>Just then a noise was au­di­ble out­side. Foot­steps rang on the metal tiling. The locks were turned, the door opened, the stew­ard ap­peared.</p>
				<p>Be­fore I could make a sin­gle move­ment to pre­vent him, the Cana­dian rushed at the poor man, threw him down, held him by the throat. The stew­ard was chok­ing in the grip of those pow­er­ful hands.</p>
				<p>Con­seil was al­ready try­ing to loosen the har­pooner’s hands from his half-suf­fo­cated vic­tim, and I had gone to join in the res­cue, when I was abruptly nailed to the spot by these words pro­nounced in French:</p>
				<p>“Calm down, Mr. Land! And you, pro­fes­sor, kindly lis­ten to me!”</p>
			</section>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
