<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="en-US" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: http://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Chapter 10</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="part-2" epub:type="part">
			<section id="chapter-2-10" epub:type="chapter">
				<h3 epub:type="title">
					<span class="first-child" epub:type="z3998:roman">X</span>
					<span class="epub-type-subtitle" epub:type="subtitle">The Underwater Coalfields</span>
				</h3>
				<p>The next day, Fe­bru­ary 20, I over­slept. I was so ex­hausted from the night be­fore, I didn’t get up un­til eleven o’clock. I dressed quickly. I hur­ried to find out the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i>’s head­ing. The in­stru­ments in­di­cated that it was run­ning south­ward at a speed of twenty miles per hour and a depth of 100 me­ters.</p>
				<p>Con­seil en­tered. I de­scribed our noc­tur­nal ex­cur­sion to him, and since the pan­els were open, he could still catch a glimpse of this sub­merged con­ti­nent.</p>
				<p>In fact, the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i> was skim­ming only ten me­ters over the soil of these At­lantis plains. The ship scud­ded along like an air bal­loon borne by the wind over some prairie on land; but it would be more ac­cu­rate to say that we sat in the lounge as if we were rid­ing in a coach on an ex­press train. As for the fore­grounds pass­ing be­fore our eyes, they were fan­tas­ti­cally carved rocks, forests of trees that had crossed over from the veg­etable king­dom into the min­eral king­dom, their mo­tion­less sil­hou­ettes sprawl­ing be­neath the waves. There also were stony masses buried be­neath car­pets of axi­dia and sea anemone, bristling with long, ver­ti­cal wa­ter plants, then strangely con­toured blocks of lava that tes­ti­fied to all the fury of those plu­tonic de­vel­op­ments.</p>
				<p>While this bizarre scenery was glit­ter­ing un­der our elec­tric beams, I told Con­seil the story of the At­lanteans, who had in­spired the old French sci­en­tist Jean Bailly to write so many en­ter­tain­ing—al­beit ut­terly fic­ti­tious—pages.<a class="epub-type-noteref" href="../text/endnotes.xhtml#note-17" id="note-17" epub:type="noteref">17</a> I told the lad about the wars of these heroic peo­ple. I dis­cussed the ques­tion of At­lantis with the fer­vor of a man who no longer had any doubts. But Con­seil was so dis­tracted he barely heard me, and his lack of in­ter­est in any com­men­tary on this his­tor­i­cal topic was soon ex­plained.</p>
				<p>In essence, nu­mer­ous fish had caught his eye, and when fish pass by, Con­seil van­ishes into his world of clas­si­fy­ing and leaves real life be­hind. In which case I could only tag along and re­sume our ichthy­olog­i­cal re­search.</p>
				<p>Even so, these At­lantic fish were not no­tice­ably dif­fer­ent from those we had ob­served ear­lier. There were rays of gi­gan­tic size, five me­ters long and with mus­cles so pow­er­ful they could leap above the waves, sharks of var­i­ous species in­clud­ing a fif­teen-foot glau­cous shark with sharp tri­an­gu­lar teeth and so trans­par­ent it was al­most in­vis­i­ble amid the wa­ters, brown lantern sharks, prism-shaped hu­mantin sharks ar­mored with pro­tu­ber­ant hides, stur­geons re­sem­bling their rel­a­tives in the Mediter­ranean, trum­pet-snouted pipefish a foot and a half long, yel­low­ish brown with small gray fins and no teeth or tongue, un­reel­ing like slim, sup­ple snakes.</p>
				<p>Among bony fish, Con­seil no­ticed some black­ish mar­lin three me­ters long with a sharp sword jut­ting from the up­per jaw, bright-col­ored wee­v­ers known in Aris­to­tle’s day as sea drag­ons and whose dor­sal stingers make them quite dan­ger­ous to pick up, then dol­phin­fish with brown backs striped in blue and edged in gold, hand­some do­ra­dos, moon­like opahs that look like azure disks but which the sun’s rays turn into spots of sil­ver, fi­nally eight-me­ter sword­fish from the genus <i epub:type="z3998:taxonomy">Xiphias</i>, swim­ming in schools, sport­ing yel­low­ish sickle-shaped fins and six-foot broadswords, stal­wart an­i­mals, plant eaters rather than fish eaters, obey­ing the tini­est sig­nals from their fe­males like hen­pecked hus­bands.</p>
				<p>But while ob­serv­ing these dif­fer­ent spec­i­mens of ma­rine fauna, I didn’t stop ex­am­in­ing the long plains of At­lantis. Some­times an un­pre­dictable ir­reg­u­lar­ity in the seafloor would force the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i> to slow down, and then it would glide into the nar­row chan­nels be­tween the hills with a cetacean’s dex­ter­ity. If the labyrinth be­came hope­lessly tan­gled, the sub­mersible would rise above it like an air­ship, and af­ter clear­ing the ob­sta­cle, it would re­sume its speedy course just a few me­ters above the ocean floor. It was an en­joy­able and im­pres­sive way of nav­i­gat­ing that did in­deed re­call the ma­neu­vers of an air­ship ride, with the ma­jor dif­fer­ence that the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i> faith­fully obeyed the hands of its helms­man.</p>
				<p>The ter­rain con­sisted mostly of thick slime mixed with pet­ri­fied branches, but it changed lit­tle by lit­tle near four o’clock in the af­ter­noon; it grew rock­ier and seemed to be strewn with pud­ding stones and a basaltic gravel called “tuff,” to­gether with bits of lava and sul­furous ob­sid­ian. I ex­pected these long plains to change into moun­tain re­gions, and in fact, as the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i> was ex­e­cut­ing cer­tain turns, I no­ticed that the southerly hori­zon was blocked by a high wall that seemed to close off ev­ery exit. Its sum­mit ob­vi­ously poked above the level of the ocean. It had to be a con­ti­nent or at least an is­land, ei­ther one of the Ca­naries or one of the Cape Verde Is­lands. Our bear­ings hadn’t been marked on the chart—per­haps de­lib­er­ately—and I had no idea what our po­si­tion was. In any case this wall seemed to sig­nal the end of At­lantis, of which, all in all, we had crossed only a small part.</p>
				<p>Night­fall didn’t in­ter­rupt my ob­ser­va­tions. I was left to my­self. Con­seil had re­paired to his cabin. The <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i> slowed down, hov­er­ing above the mud­dled masses on the seafloor, some­times graz­ing them as if want­ing to come to rest, some­times ris­ing un­pre­dictably to the sur­face of the waves. Then I glimpsed a few bright con­stel­la­tions through the crys­tal wa­ters, specif­i­cally five or six of those zo­di­a­cal stars trail­ing from the tail end of Orion.</p>
				<p>I would have stayed longer at my win­dow, mar­veling at these beau­ties of sea and sky, but the pan­els closed. Just then the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i> had ar­rived at the per­pen­dic­u­lar face of that high wall. How the ship would ma­neu­ver I hadn’t a guess. I re­paired to my state­room. The <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i> did not stir. I fell asleep with the firm in­ten­tion of wak­ing up in just a few hours.</p>
				<p>But it was eight o’clock the next day when I re­turned to the lounge. I stared at the pres­sure gauge. It told me that the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i> was afloat on the sur­face of the ocean. Fur­ther­more, I heard the sound of foot­steps on the plat­form. Yet there were no rolling move­ments to in­di­cate the pres­ence of waves un­du­lat­ing above me.</p>
				<p>I climbed as far as the hatch. It was open. But in­stead of the broad day­light I was ex­pect­ing, I found that I was sur­rounded by to­tal dark­ness. Where were we? Had I been mis­taken? Was it still night? No! Not one star was twin­kling, and night­time is never so ut­terly black.</p>
				<p>I wasn’t sure what to think, when a voice said to me:</p>
				<p>“Is that you, pro­fes­sor?”</p>
				<p>“Ah, Cap­tain Nemo!” I replied. “Where are we?”</p>
				<p>“Un­der­ground, pro­fes­sor.”</p>
				<p>“Un­der­ground!” I ex­claimed. “And the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i> is still float­ing?”</p>
				<p>“It al­ways floats.”</p>
				<p>“But I don’t un­der­stand!”</p>
				<p>“Wait a lit­tle while. Our bea­con is about to go on, and if you want some light on the sub­ject, you’ll be sat­is­fied.”</p>
				<p>I set foot on the plat­form and waited. The dark­ness was so pro­found I couldn’t see even Cap­tain Nemo. How­ever, look­ing at the zenith di­rectly over­head, I thought I caught sight of a fee­ble glim­mer, a sort of twi­light fil­ter­ing through a cir­cu­lar hole. Just then the bea­con sud­denly went on, and its in­tense bright­ness made that hazy light van­ish.</p>
				<p>This stream of elec­tric­ity daz­zled my eyes, and af­ter mo­men­tar­ily shut­ting them, I looked around. The <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i> was sta­tion­ary. It was float­ing next to an em­bank­ment shaped like a wharf. As for the wa­ter now buoy­ing the ship, it was a lake com­pletely en­cir­cled by an in­ner wall about two miles in di­am­e­ter, hence six miles around. Its level—as in­di­cated by the pres­sure gauge—would be the same as the out­side level, be­cause some con­nec­tion had to ex­ist be­tween this lake and the sea. Slant­ing in­ward over their base, these high walls con­verged to form a vault shaped like an im­mense up­side-down fun­nel that mea­sured 500 or 600 me­ters in height. At its sum­mit there gaped the cir­cu­lar open­ing through which I had de­tected that faint glim­mer, ob­vi­ously day­light.</p>
				<p>Be­fore more care­fully ex­am­in­ing the in­te­rior fea­tures of this enor­mous cav­ern, and be­fore de­cid­ing if it was the work of na­ture or hu­mankind, I went over to Cap­tain Nemo.</p>
				<p>“Where are we?” I said.</p>
				<p>“In the very heart of an ex­tinct vol­cano,” the cap­tain an­swered me, “a vol­cano whose in­te­rior was in­vaded by the sea af­ter some con­vul­sion in the earth. While you were sleep­ing, pro­fes­sor, the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i> en­tered this la­goon through a nat­u­ral chan­nel that opens ten me­ters be­low the sur­face of the ocean. This is our home port, se­cure, con­ve­nient, se­cret, and shel­tered against winds from any di­rec­tion! Along the coasts of your con­ti­nents or is­lands, show me any off­shore moor­ing that can equal this safe refuge for with­stand­ing the fury of hur­ri­canes.”</p>
				<p>“In­deed,” I replied, “here you’re in per­fect safety, Cap­tain Nemo. Who could reach you in the heart of a vol­cano? But don’t I see an open­ing at its sum­mit?”</p>
				<p>“Yes, its crater, a crater for­merly filled with lava, steam, and flames, but which now lets in this life-giv­ing air we’re breath­ing.”</p>
				<p>“But which vol­canic moun­tain is this?” I asked.</p>
				<p>“It’s one of the many islets with which this sea is strewn. For ships a mere reef, for us an im­mense cav­ern. I dis­cov­ered it by chance, and chance served me well.”</p>
				<p>“But couldn’t some­one en­ter through the mouth of its crater?”</p>
				<p>“No more than I could exit through it. You can climb about 100 feet up the in­ner base of this moun­tain, but then the walls over­hang, they lean too far in to be scaled.”</p>
				<p>“I can see, cap­tain, that na­ture is your obe­di­ent ser­vant, any time or any place. You’re safe on this lake, and no­body else can visit its wa­ters. But what’s the pur­pose of this refuge? The <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i> doesn’t need a har­bor.”</p>
				<p>“No, pro­fes­sor, but it needs elec­tric­ity to run, bat­ter­ies to gen­er­ate its elec­tric­ity, sodium to feed its bat­ter­ies, coal to make its sodium, and coal­fields from which to dig its coal. Now then, right at this spot the sea cov­ers en­tire forests that sank un­der­wa­ter in pre­his­toric times; to­day, turned to stone, trans­formed into car­bon fuel, they of­fer me in­ex­haustible coal mines.”</p>
				<p>“So, cap­tain, your men prac­tice the trade of min­ers here?”</p>
				<p>“Pre­cisely. Th­ese mines ex­tend un­der the waves like the coal­fields at New­cas­tle. Here, dressed in div­ing suits, pick and mat­tock in hand, my men go out and dig this car­bon fuel for which I don’t need a sin­gle mine on land. When I burn this com­bustible to pro­duce sodium, the smoke es­cap­ing from the moun­tain’s crater gives it the ap­pear­ance of a still-ac­tive vol­cano.”</p>
				<p>“And will we see your com­pan­ions at work?”</p>
				<p>“No, at least not this time, be­cause I’m ea­ger to con­tinue our un­der­wa­ter tour of the world. Ac­cord­ingly, I’ll rest con­tent with draw­ing on my re­serve stock of sodium. We’ll stay here long enough to load it on board, in other words, a sin­gle work­day, then we’ll re­sume our voy­age. So, Pro­fes­sor Aron­nax, if you’d like to ex­plore this cav­ern and cir­cle its la­goon, seize the day.”</p>
				<p>I thanked the cap­tain and went to look for my two com­pan­ions, who hadn’t yet left their cabin. I in­vited them to fol­low me, not telling them where we were.</p>
				<p>They climbed onto the plat­form. Con­seil, whom noth­ing could star­tle, saw it as a per­fectly nat­u­ral thing to fall asleep un­der the waves and wake up un­der a moun­tain. But Ned Land had no idea in his head other than to see if this cav­ern of­fered some way out.</p>
				<p>After break­fast near ten o’clock, we went down onto the em­bank­ment.</p>
				<p>“So here we are, back on shore,” Con­seil said.</p>
				<p>“I’d hardly call this shore,” the Cana­dian replied. “And be­sides, we aren’t on it but un­der it.”</p>
				<p>A sandy beach un­folded be­fore us, mea­sur­ing 500 feet at its widest point be­tween the wa­ters of the lake and the foot of the moun­tain’s walls. Via this strand you could eas­ily cir­cle the lake. But the base of these high walls con­sisted of bro­ken soil over which there lay pic­turesque piles of vol­canic blocks and enor­mous pumice stones. All these crum­bling masses were cov­ered with an enamel pol­ished by the ac­tion of un­der­ground fires, and they glis­tened un­der the stream of elec­tric light from our bea­con. Stirred up by our foot­steps, the mica-rich dust on this beach flew into the air like a cloud of sparks.</p>
				<p>The ground rose ap­pre­cia­bly as it moved away from the sand flats by the waves, and we soon ar­rived at some long, wind­ing gra­di­ents, gen­uinely steep paths that al­lowed us to climb lit­tle by lit­tle; but we had to tread cau­tiously in the midst of pud­ding stones that weren’t ce­mented to­gether, and our feet kept skid­ding on glassy tra­chyte, made of feldspar and quartz crys­tals.</p>
				<p>The vol­canic na­ture of this enor­mous pit was ap­par­ent all around us. I ven­tured to com­ment on it to my com­pan­ions.</p>
				<p>“Can you pic­ture,” I asked them, “what this fun­nel must have been like when it was filled with boil­ing lava, and the level of that in­can­des­cent liq­uid rose right to the moun­tain’s mouth, like cast iron up the in­sides of a fur­nace?”</p>
				<p>“I can pic­ture it per­fectly,” Con­seil replied. “But will mas­ter tell me why this huge smelter sus­pended op­er­a­tions, and how it is that an oven was re­placed by the tran­quil wa­ters of a lake?”</p>
				<p>“In all like­li­hood, Con­seil, be­cause some con­vul­sion cre­ated an open­ing be­low the sur­face of the ocean, the open­ing that serves as a pas­sage­way for the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i>. Then the wa­ters of the At­lantic rushed in­side the moun­tain. There en­sued a dread­ful strug­gle be­tween the el­e­ments of fire and wa­ter, a strug­gle end­ing in King Nep­tune’s fa­vor. But many cen­turies have passed since then, and this sub­merged vol­cano has changed into a peace­ful cav­ern.”</p>
				<p>“That’s fine,” Ned Land an­swered. “I ac­cept the ex­pla­na­tion, but in our per­sonal in­ter­ests, I’m sorry this open­ing the pro­fes­sor men­tions wasn’t made above sea level.”</p>
				<p>“But Ned my friend,” Con­seil an­swered, “if it weren’t an un­der­wa­ter pas­sage­way, the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i> couldn’t en­ter it!”</p>
				<p>“And I might add, Mr. Land,” I said, “that the wa­ters wouldn’t have rushed un­der the moun­tain, and the vol­cano would still be a vol­cano. So you have noth­ing to be sorry about.”</p>
				<p>Our climb con­tin­ued. The gra­di­ents got steeper and nar­rower. Some­times they were cut across by deep pits that had to be cleared. Masses of over­hang­ing rock had to be got­ten around. You slid on your knees, you crept on your belly. But helped by the Cana­dian’s strength and Con­seil’s dex­ter­ity, we over­came ev­ery ob­sta­cle.</p>
				<p>At an el­e­va­tion of about thirty me­ters, the na­ture of the ter­rain changed with­out be­com­ing any eas­ier. Pud­ding stones and tra­chyte gave way to black basaltic rock: here, ly­ing in slabs all swollen with blis­ters; there, shaped like ac­tual prisms and ar­ranged into a se­ries of col­umns that sup­ported the spring­ings of this im­mense vault, a won­der­ful sam­ple of nat­u­ral ar­chi­tec­ture. Then, among this basaltic rock, there snaked long, hard­ened lava flows in­laid with veins of bi­tu­mi­nous coal and in places cov­ered by wide car­pets of sul­fur. The sun­shine com­ing through the crater had grown stronger, shed­ding a hazy light over all the vol­canic waste for­ever buried in the heart of this ex­tinct moun­tain.</p>
				<p>But when we had as­cended to an el­e­va­tion of about 250 feet, we were stopped by in­sur­mount­able ob­sta­cles. The con­verg­ing in­side walls changed into over­hangs, and our climb into a cir­cu­lar stroll. At this top­most level the veg­etable king­dom be­gan to chal­lenge the min­eral king­dom. Shrubs, and even a few trees, emerged from crevices in the walls. I rec­og­nized some spurges that let their caus­tic, purga­tive sap trickle out. There were he­liotropes, very re­miss at liv­ing up to their sun-wor­ship­ping rep­u­ta­tions since no sun­light ever reached them; their clus­ters of flow­ers drooped sadly, their col­ors and scents were faded. Here and there chrysan­the­mums sprouted timidly at the feet of aloes with long, sad, sickly leaves. But be­tween these lava flows I spot­ted lit­tle vi­o­lets that still gave off a sub­tle fra­grance, and I con­fess that I in­haled it with de­light. The soul of a flower is its scent, and those splen­did wa­ter plants, flow­ers of the sea, have no souls!</p>
				<p>We had ar­rived at the foot of a sturdy clump of dragon trees, which were split­ting the rocks with ex­er­tions of their mus­cu­lar roots, when Ned Land ex­claimed:</p>
				<p>“Oh, sir, a hive!”</p>
				<p>“A hive?” I an­swered, with a ges­ture of ut­ter dis­be­lief.</p>
				<p>“Yes, a hive,” the Cana­dian re­peated, “with bees buzzing around!”</p>
				<p>I went closer and was forced to rec­og­nize the ob­vi­ous. At the mouth of a hole cut in the trunk of a dragon tree, there swarmed thou­sands of these in­ge­nious in­sects so com­mon to all the Ca­nary Is­lands, where their out­put is es­pe­cially prized.</p>
				<p>Nat­u­rally enough, the Cana­dian wanted to lay in a sup­ply of honey, and it would have been ill-man­nered of me to say no. He mixed sul­fur with some dry leaves, set them on fire with a spark from his tin­der­box, and pro­ceeded to smoke the bees out. Lit­tle by lit­tle the buzzing died down and the dis­em­bow­eled hive yielded sev­eral pounds of sweet honey. Ned Land stuffed his haver­sack with it.</p>
				<p>“When I’ve mixed this honey with our bread­fruit bat­ter,” he told us, “I’ll be ready to serve you a de­lec­ta­ble piece of cake.”</p>
				<p>“But of course,” Con­seil put in, “it will be gin­ger­bread!”</p>
				<p>“I’m all for gin­ger­bread,” I said, “but let’s re­sume this fas­ci­nat­ing stroll.”</p>
				<p>At cer­tain turns in the trail we were go­ing along, the lake ap­peared in its full ex­panse. The ship’s bea­con lit up that whole placid sur­face, which ex­pe­ri­enced nei­ther rip­ples nor un­du­la­tions. The <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i> lay per­fectly still. On its plat­form and on the em­bank­ment, crew­men were bustling around, black shad­ows that stood out clearly in the midst of the lu­mi­nous air.</p>
				<p>Just then we went around the high­est ridge of these rocky foothills that sup­ported the vault. Then I saw that bees weren’t the an­i­mal king­dom’s only rep­re­sen­ta­tives in­side this vol­cano. Here and in the shad­ows, birds of prey soared and whirled, fly­ing away from nests perched on tips of rock. There were spar­row hawks with white bel­lies, and screech­ing kestrels. With all the speed their stilt­like legs could muster, fine fat bus­tards scam­pered over the slopes. I’ll let the reader de­cide whether the Cana­dian’s ap­petite was aroused by the sight of this tasty game, and whether he re­gret­ted hav­ing no ri­fle in his hands. He tried to make stones do the work of bul­lets, and af­ter sev­eral fruit­less at­tempts, he man­aged to wound one of these mag­nif­i­cent bus­tards. To say he risked his life twenty times in or­der to cap­ture this bird is sim­ply the unadul­ter­ated truth; but he fared so well, the an­i­mal went into his sack to join the hon­ey­combs.</p>
				<p>By then we were forced to go back down to the beach be­cause the ridge had be­come im­pos­si­ble. Above us, the yawn­ing crater looked like the wide mouth of a well. From where we stood, the sky was pretty easy to see, and I watched clouds race by, di­sheveled by the west wind, let­ting tat­ters of mist trail over the moun­tain’s sum­mit. Proof pos­i­tive that those clouds kept at a mod­er­ate al­ti­tude, be­cause this vol­cano didn’t rise more than 1,800 feet above the level of the ocean.</p>
				<p>Half an hour af­ter the Cana­dian’s lat­est ex­ploits, we were back on the in­ner beach. There the lo­cal flora was rep­re­sented by a wide car­pet of sam­phire, a small um­bel­lif­er­ous plant that keeps quite nicely, which also boasts the names glass­wort, sax­ifrage, and sea fen­nel. Con­seil picked a cou­ple bunches. As for the lo­cal fauna, it in­cluded thou­sands of crus­taceans of ev­ery type: lob­sters, her­mit crabs, prawns, mysid shrimps, daddy lon­glegs, rock crabs, and a prodi­gious num­ber of seashells, such as cowries, murex snails, and limpets.</p>
				<p>In this lo­cal­ity there gaped the mouth of a mag­nif­i­cent cave. My com­pan­ions and I took great plea­sure in stretch­ing out on its fine-grained sand. Fire had pol­ished the sparkling enamel of its in­ner walls, sprin­kled all over with mica-rich dust. Ned Land tapped these walls and tried to probe their thick­ness. I couldn’t help smil­ing. Our con­ver­sa­tion then turned to his ev­er­last­ing es­cape plans, and with­out go­ing too far, I felt I could of­fer him this hope: Cap­tain Nemo had gone down south only to re­plen­ish his sodium sup­plies. So I hoped he would now hug the coasts of Europe and Amer­ica, which would al­low the Cana­dian to try again with a greater chance of suc­cess.</p>
				<p>We were stretched out in this de­light­ful cave for an hour. Our con­ver­sa­tion, lively at the out­set, then lan­guished. A def­i­nite drowsi­ness over­came us. Since I saw no good rea­son to re­sist the call of sleep, I fell into a heavy doze. I dreamed—one doesn’t choose his dreams—that my life had been re­duced to the veg­e­tat­ing ex­is­tence of a sim­ple mol­lusk. It seemed to me that this cave made up my dou­ble-valved shell. …</p>
				<p>Sud­denly Con­seil’s voice star­tled me awake.</p>
				<p>“Get up! Get up!” shouted the fine lad.</p>
				<p>“What is it?” I asked, in a sit­ting po­si­tion.</p>
				<p>“The wa­ter’s com­ing up to us!”</p>
				<p>I got back on my feet. Like a tor­rent the sea was rush­ing into our re­treat, and since we def­i­nitely were not mol­lusks, we had to clear out.</p>
				<p>In a few sec­onds we were safe on top of the cave.</p>
				<p>“What hap­pened?” Con­seil asked. “Some new phe­nom­e­non?”</p>
				<p>“Not quite, my friends!” I replied. “It was the tide, merely the tide, which well-nigh caught us by sur­prise just as it did Sir Wal­ter Scott’s hero! The ocean out­side is ris­ing, and by a per­fectly nat­u­ral law of bal­ance, the level of this lake is also ris­ing. We’ve got­ten off with a mild dunk­ing. Let’s go change clothes on the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i>.”</p>
				<p>Three-quar­ters of an hour later, we had com­pleted our cir­cu­lar stroll and were back on board. Just then the crew­men fin­ished load­ing the sodium sup­plies, and the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i> could have de­parted im­me­di­ately.</p>
				<p>But Cap­tain Nemo gave no or­ders. Would he wait for night­fall and exit through his un­der­wa­ter pas­sage­way in se­crecy? Per­haps.</p>
				<p>Be that as it may, by the next day the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i> had left its home port and was nav­i­gat­ing well out from any shore, a few me­ters be­neath the waves of the At­lantic.</p>
			</section>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
