<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="en-US" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: http://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Chapter 2</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="part-1" epub:type="part">
			<section id="chapter-1-2" epub:type="chapter">
				<h3 epub:type="title">
					<span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span>
					<span class="epub-type-subtitle" epub:type="subtitle">The Pros and Cons</span>
				</h3>
				<p>Dur­ing the pe­riod in which these de­vel­op­ments were oc­cur­ring, I had re­turned from a sci­en­tific un­der­tak­ing or­ga­nized to ex­plore the Ne­braska bad­lands in the United States. In my ca­pac­ity as As­sis­tant Pro­fes­sor at the Paris Mu­seum of Nat­u­ral His­tory, I had been at­tached to this ex­pe­di­tion by the French gov­ern­ment. After spend­ing six months in Ne­braska, I ar­rived in New York laden with valu­able col­lec­tions near the end of March. My de­par­ture for France was set for early May. In the mean­time, then, I was busy clas­si­fy­ing my min­er­alog­i­cal, botan­i­cal, and zo­o­log­i­cal trea­sures when that in­ci­dent took place with the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Sco­tia</i>.</p>
				<p>I was per­fectly abreast of this ques­tion, which was the big news of the day, and how could I not have been? I had read and reread ev­ery Amer­i­can and Euro­pean news­pa­per with­out be­ing any far­ther along. This mys­tery puz­zled me. Find­ing it im­pos­si­ble to form any views, I drifted from one ex­treme to the other. Some­thing was out there, that much was cer­tain, and any doubt­ing Thomas was in­vited to place his fin­ger on the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Sco­tia</i>’s wound.</p>
				<p>When I ar­rived in New York, the ques­tion was at the boil­ing point. The hy­poth­e­sis of a drift­ing islet or an elu­sive reef, put for­ward by peo­ple not quite in their right minds, was com­pletely elim­i­nated. And in­deed, un­less this reef had an en­gine in its belly, how could it move about with such prodi­gious speed?</p>
				<p>Also dis­cred­ited was the idea of a float­ing hull or some other enor­mous wreck­age, and again be­cause of this speed of move­ment.</p>
				<p>So only two pos­si­ble so­lu­tions to the ques­tion were left, cre­at­ing two very dis­tinct groups of sup­port­ers: on one side, those fa­vor­ing a mon­ster of colos­sal strength; on the other, those fa­vor­ing an “un­der­wa­ter boat” of tremen­dous mo­tor power.</p>
				<p>Now then, al­though the lat­ter hy­poth­e­sis was com­pletely ad­mis­si­ble, it couldn’t stand up to in­quiries con­ducted in both the New World and the Old. That a pri­vate in­di­vid­ual had such a mech­a­nism at his dis­posal was less than prob­a­ble. Where and when had he built it, and how could he have built it in se­cret?</p>
				<p>Only some gov­ern­ment could own such an en­gine of de­struc­tion, and in these dis­as­ter-filled times, when men tax their in­ge­nu­ity to build in­creas­ingly pow­er­ful ag­gres­sive weapons, it was pos­si­ble that, un­known to the rest of the world, some na­tion could have been test­ing such a fear­some ma­chine. The Chas­se­pot ri­fle led to the tor­pedo, and the tor­pedo has led to this un­der­wa­ter bat­ter­ing ram, which in turn will lead to the world putting its foot down. At least I hope it will.</p>
				<p>But this hy­poth­e­sis of a war ma­chine col­lapsed in the face of for­mal de­nials from the var­i­ous gov­ern­ments. Since the pub­lic in­ter­est was at stake and transoceanic travel was suf­fer­ing, the sin­cer­ity of these gov­ern­ments could not be doubted. Be­sides, how could the as­sem­bly of this un­der­wa­ter boat have es­caped pub­lic no­tice? Keep­ing a se­cret un­der such cir­cum­stances would be dif­fi­cult enough for an in­di­vid­ual, and cer­tainly im­pos­si­ble for a na­tion whose ev­ery move is un­der con­stant sur­veil­lance by ri­val pow­ers.</p>
				<p>So, af­ter in­quiries con­ducted in Eng­land, France, Rus­sia, Prus­sia, Spain, Italy, Amer­ica, and even Turkey, the hy­poth­e­sis of an un­der­wa­ter <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Mon­i­tor</i> was ul­ti­mately re­jected.</p>
				<p>And so the mon­ster sur­faced again, de­spite the end­less wit­ti­cisms heaped on it by the pop­u­lar press, and the hu­man imag­i­na­tion soon got caught up in the most ridicu­lous ichthy­olog­i­cal fan­tasies.</p>
				<p>After I ar­rived in New York, sev­eral peo­ple did me the honor of con­sult­ing me on the phe­nom­e­non in ques­tion. In France I had pub­lished a two-vol­ume work, in quarto, en­ti­tled <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">The Mys­ter­ies of the Great Ocean Depths</i>. Well re­ceived in schol­arly cir­cles, this book had es­tab­lished me as a spe­cial­ist in this pretty ob­scure field of nat­u­ral his­tory. My views were in de­mand. As long as I could deny the re­al­ity of the busi­ness, I con­fined my­self to a flat “no com­ment.” But soon, pinned to the wall, I had to ex­plain my­self straight out. And in this vein, “the hon­or­able Pierre Aron­nax, Pro­fes­sor at the Paris Mu­seum,” was sum­moned by the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.newspaper">New York Her­ald</i> to for­mu­late his views no mat­ter what.</p>
				<p>I com­plied. Since I could no longer hold my tongue, I let it wag. I dis­cussed the ques­tion in its ev­ery as­pect, both po­lit­i­cal and sci­en­tific, and this is an ex­cerpt from the well-padded ar­ti­cle I pub­lished in the is­sue of April 30.</p>
				<p>“There­fore,” I wrote, “af­ter ex­am­in­ing these dif­fer­ent hy­pothe­ses one by one, we are forced, ev­ery other sup­po­si­tion hav­ing been re­futed, to ac­cept the ex­is­tence of an ex­tremely pow­er­ful ma­rine an­i­mal.</p>
				<p>“The deep­est parts of the ocean are to­tally un­known to us. No sound­ings have been able to reach them. What goes on in those dis­tant depths? What crea­tures in­habit, or could in­habit, those re­gions twelve or fif­teen miles be­neath the sur­face of the wa­ter? What is the con­sti­tu­tion of these an­i­mals? It’s al­most be­yond con­jec­ture.</p>
				<p>“How­ever, the so­lu­tion to this prob­lem sub­mit­ted to me can take the form of a choice be­tween two al­ter­na­tives.</p>
				<p>“Either we know ev­ery va­ri­ety of crea­ture pop­u­lat­ing our planet, or we do not.</p>
				<p>“If we do not know ev­ery one of them, if na­ture still keeps ichthy­olog­i­cal se­crets from us, noth­ing is more ad­mis­si­ble than to ac­cept the ex­is­tence of fish or cetaceans of new species or even new gen­era, an­i­mals with a ba­si­cally ‘cast-iron’ con­sti­tu­tion that in­habit strata be­yond the reach of our sound­ings, and which some de­vel­op­ment or other, an urge or a whim if you pre­fer, can bring to the up­per level of the ocean for long in­ter­vals.</p>
				<p>“If, on the other hand, we do know ev­ery liv­ing species, we must look for the an­i­mal in ques­tion among those ma­rine crea­tures al­ready cat­a­loged, and in this event I would be in­clined to ac­cept the ex­is­tence of a gi­ant nar­whale.</p>
				<p>“The com­mon nar­whale, or sea uni­corn, of­ten reaches a length of sixty feet. In­crease its di­men­sions five­fold or even ten­fold, then give this cetacean a strength in pro­por­tion to its size while en­larg­ing its of­fen­sive weapons, and you have the an­i­mal we’re look­ing for. It would have the pro­por­tions de­ter­mined by the of­fi­cers of the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Shan­non</i>, the in­stru­ment needed to per­fo­rate the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Sco­tia</i>, and the power to pierce a steamer’s hull.</p>
				<p>“In essence, the nar­whale is armed with a sort of ivory sword, or lance, as cer­tain nat­u­ral­ists have ex­pressed it. It’s a king-sized tooth as hard as steel. Some of these teeth have been found buried in the bod­ies of baleen whales, which the nar­whale at­tacks with in­vari­able suc­cess. Others have been wrenched, not with­out dif­fi­culty, from the un­der­sides of ves­sels that nar­whales have pierced clean through, as a gim­let pierces a wine bar­rel. The mu­seum at the Fac­ulty of Medicine in Paris owns one of these tusks with a length of 2.25 me­ters and a width at its base of forty-eight cen­time­ters!</p>
				<p>“All right then! Imag­ine this weapon to be ten times stronger and the an­i­mal ten times more pow­er­ful, launch it at a speed of twenty miles per hour, mul­ti­ply its mass times its ve­loc­ity, and you get just the col­li­sion we need to cause the spec­i­fied catas­tro­phe.</p>
				<p>“So, un­til in­for­ma­tion be­comes more abun­dant, I plump for a sea uni­corn of colos­sal di­men­sions, no longer armed with a mere lance but with an ac­tual spur, like iron­clad frigates or those war­ships called ‘rams,’ whose mass and mo­tor power it would pos­sess si­mul­ta­ne­ously.</p>
				<p>“This in­ex­pli­ca­ble phe­nom­e­non is thus ex­plained away—un­less it’s some­thing else en­tirely, which, de­spite ev­ery­thing that has been sighted, stud­ied, ex­plored and ex­pe­ri­enced, is still pos­si­ble!”</p>
				<p>Th­ese last words were cow­ardly of me; but as far as I could, I wanted to pro­tect my pro­fes­so­rial dig­nity and not lay my­self open to laugh­ter from the Amer­i­cans, who when they do laugh, laugh rau­cously. I had left my­self a loop­hole. Yet deep down, I had ac­cepted the ex­is­tence of “the mon­ster.”</p>
				<p>My ar­ti­cle was hotly de­bated, caus­ing a fine old up­roar. It ral­lied a num­ber of sup­port­ers. More­over, the so­lu­tion it pro­posed al­lowed for free play of the imag­i­na­tion. The hu­man mind en­joys im­pres­sive vi­sions of un­earthly crea­tures. Now then, the sea is pre­cisely their best medium, the only set­ting suit­able for the breed­ing and grow­ing of such gi­ants—next to which such land an­i­mals as ele­phants or rhinoceroses are mere dwarves. The liq­uid masses sup­port the largest known species of mam­mals and per­haps con­ceal mol­lusks of in­com­pa­ra­ble size or crus­taceans too fright­ful to con­tem­plate, such as 100-me­ter lob­sters or crabs weigh­ing 200 met­ric tons! Why not? Formerly, in pre­his­toric days, land an­i­mals (quadrupeds, apes, rep­tiles, birds) were built on a gi­gan­tic scale. Our Creator cast them us­ing a colos­sal mold that time has grad­u­ally made smaller. With its un­told depths, couldn’t the sea keep alive such huge spec­i­mens of life from an­other age, this sea that never changes while the land masses un­dergo al­most con­tin­u­ous al­ter­ation? Couldn’t the heart of the ocean hide the last-re­main­ing va­ri­eties of these ti­tanic species, for whom years are cen­turies and cen­turies mil­len­nia?</p>
				<p>But I mustn’t let these fan­tasies run away with me! Enough of these fairy tales that time has changed for me into harsh re­al­i­ties. I re­peat: opin­ion had crys­tal­lized as to the na­ture of this phe­nom­e­non, and the pub­lic ac­cepted with­out ar­gu­ment the ex­is­tence of a prodi­gious crea­ture that had noth­ing in com­mon with the fa­bled sea ser­pent.</p>
				<p>Yet if some saw it purely as a sci­en­tific prob­lem to be solved, more prac­ti­cal peo­ple, es­pe­cially in Amer­ica and Eng­land, were de­ter­mined to purge the ocean of this daunt­ing mon­ster, to in­sure the safety of transoceanic travel. The in­dus­trial and com­mer­cial news­pa­pers dealt with the ques­tion chiefly from this view­point. The <i epub:type="se:name.publication.newspaper">Ship­ping &amp; Mer­can­tile Gazette</i>, the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.newspaper">Lloyd’s List</i>, France’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.newspaper">Pack­et­boat and Mar­itime &amp; Colo­nial Re­view</i>, all the rags de­voted to in­sur­ance com­pa­nies—who threat­ened to raise their pre­mium rates—were unan­i­mous on this point.</p>
				<p>Public opin­ion be­ing pro­nounced, the States of the Union were the first in the field. In New York prepa­ra­tions were un­der way for an ex­pe­di­tion de­signed to chase this nar­whale. A high-speed frigate, the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Abra­ham Lin­coln</i>, was fit­ted out for putting to sea as soon as pos­si­ble. The naval ar­se­nals were un­locked for Com­man­der Far­ragut, who pressed en­er­get­i­cally for­ward with the arm­ing of his frigate.</p>
				<p>But, as it al­ways hap­pens, just when a de­ci­sion had been made to chase the mon­ster, the mon­ster put in no fur­ther ap­pear­ances. For two months no­body heard a word about it. Not a sin­gle ship en­coun­tered it. Ap­par­ently the uni­corn had got­ten wise to these plots be­ing wo­ven around it. Peo­ple were con­stantly bab­bling about the crea­ture, even via the At­lantic Cable! Ac­cord­ingly, the wags claimed that this slip­pery ras­cal had way­laid some pass­ing tele­gram and was mak­ing the most of it.</p>
				<p>So the frigate was equipped for a far-off voy­age and armed with fear­some fish­ing gear, but no­body knew where to steer it. And im­pa­tience grew un­til, on June 2, word came that the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Tampico</i>, a steamer on the San Fran­cisco line sail­ing from Cal­i­for­nia to Shang­hai, had sighted the an­i­mal again, three weeks be­fore in the northerly seas of the Pa­cific.</p>
				<p>This news caused in­tense ex­cite­ment. Not even a 24-hour breather was granted to Com­man­der Far­ragut. His pro­vi­sions were loaded on board. His coal bunkers were over­flow­ing. Not a crew­man was miss­ing from his post. To cast off, he needed only to fire and stoke his fur­naces! Half a day’s de­lay would have been un­for­giv­able! But Com­man­der Far­ragut wanted noth­ing more than to go forth.</p>
				<p>I re­ceived a let­ter three hours be­fore the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Abra­ham Lin­coln</i> left its Brook­lyn pier;<a class="epub-type-noteref" href="../text/endnotes.xhtml#note-3" id="note-3" epub:type="noteref">3</a> the let­ter read as fol­lows:</p>
				<blockquote class="epub-type-z3998-letter" epub:type="z3998:letter">
					<header class="epub-type-se-letter.dateline" epub:type="se:letter.dateline">
						<p>Pierre Aron­nax</p>
						<p>Pro­fes­sor at the Paris Mu­seum</p>
						<p>Fifth Av­enue Ho­tel</p>
						<p>New York</p>
					</header>
					<div class="epub-type-se-letter.body" epub:type="se:letter.body">
						<p epub:type="z3998:salutation">Sir:</p>
						<p>If you would like to join the ex­pe­di­tion on the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Abra­ham Lin­coln</i>, the gov­ern­ment of the Union will be pleased to re­gard you as France’s rep­re­sen­ta­tive in this un­der­tak­ing. Com­man­der Far­ragut has a cabin at your dis­posal.</p>
					</div>
					<footer class="epub-type-z3998-valediction" epub:type="z3998:valediction">
						<p>Very cor­dially yours,</p>
						<p class="signature"><span class="name">J. B.</span> Hob­son,</p>
						<p>Sec­re­tary of the Navy.</p>
					</footer>
				</blockquote>
			</section>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
