<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="en-US" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: http://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Chapter 20</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="part-1" epub:type="part">
			<section id="chapter-1-20" epub:type="chapter">
				<h3 epub:type="title">
					<span class="first-child" epub:type="z3998:roman">XX</span>
					<span class="epub-type-subtitle" epub:type="subtitle">The Torres Strait</span>
				</h3>
				<p>Dur­ing the night of De­cem­ber 27–28, the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i> left the wa­ter­ways of Vanikoro be­hind with ex­tra­or­di­nary speed. Its head­ing was south­west­erly, and in three days it had cleared the 750 leagues that sep­a­rated La Pérouse’s is­lands from the south­east­ern tip of Pa­pua.</p>
				<p>On Jan­uary 1, 1868, bright and early, Con­seil joined me on the plat­form.</p>
				<p>“Will mas­ter,” the gal­lant lad said to me, “al­low me to wish him a happy new year?”</p>
				<p>“Good heav­ens, Con­seil, it’s just like old times in my of­fice at the Botan­i­cal Gar­dens in Paris! I ac­cept your kind wishes and I thank you for them. Only, I’d like to know what you mean by a ‘happy year’ un­der the cir­cum­stances in which we’re placed. Is it a year that will bring our im­pris­on­ment to an end, or a year that will see this strange voy­age con­tinue?”</p>
				<p>“Ye gods,” Con­seil replied, “I hardly know what to tell mas­ter. We’re cer­tainly see­ing some un­usual things, and for two months we’ve had no time for bore­dom. The lat­est won­der is al­ways the most as­ton­ish­ing, and if this pro­gres­sion keeps up, I can’t imag­ine what its cli­max will be. In my opin­ion, we’ll never again have such an op­por­tu­nity.”</p>
				<p>“Never, Con­seil.”</p>
				<p>“Be­sides, Mr. Nemo re­ally lives up to his Latin name, since he couldn’t be less in the way if he didn’t ex­ist.”</p>
				<p>“True enough, Con­seil.”</p>
				<p>“There­fore, with all due re­spect to mas­ter, I think a ‘happy year’ would be a year that lets us see ev­ery­thing—”</p>
				<p>“Every­thing, Con­seil? No year could be that long. But what does Ned Land think about all this?”</p>
				<p>“Ned Land’s thoughts are ex­actly the op­po­site of mine,” Con­seil replied. “He has a prac­ti­cal mind and a de­mand­ing stom­ach. He’s tired of star­ing at fish and eat­ing them day in and day out. This short­age of wine, bread, and meat isn’t suit­able for an up­stand­ing An­glo-Saxon, a man ac­cus­tomed to beef­steak and un­fazed by reg­u­lar doses of brandy or gin!”</p>
				<p>“For my part, Con­seil, that doesn’t bother me in the least, and I’ve ad­justed very nicely to the diet on board.”</p>
				<p>“So have I,” Con­seil replied. “Ac­cord­ingly, I think as much about stay­ing as Mr. Land about mak­ing his es­cape. Thus, if this new year isn’t a happy one for me, it will be for him, and vice versa. No mat­ter what hap­pens, one of us will be pleased. So, in con­clu­sion, I wish mas­ter to have what­ever his heart de­sires.”</p>
				<p>“Thank you, Con­seil. Only I must ask you to post­pone the ques­tion of new year’s gifts, and tem­po­rar­ily ac­cept a hearty hand­shake in their place. That’s all I have on me.”</p>
				<p>“Master has never been more gen­er­ous,” Con­seil replied.</p>
				<p>And with that, the gal­lant lad went away.</p>
				<p>By Jan­uary 2 we had fared 11,340 miles, hence 5,250 leagues, from our start­ing point in the seas of Ja­pan. Be­fore the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i>’s spur there stretched the dan­ger­ous wa­ter­ways of the Co­ral Sea, off the north­east coast of Aus­tralia. Our boat cruised along a few miles away from that daunt­ing shoal where Cap­tain Cook’s ships well-nigh mis­car­ried on June 10, 1770. The craft that Cook was aboard charged into some coral rock, and if his ves­sel didn’t go down, it was thanks to the cir­cum­stance that a piece of coral broke off in the col­li­sion and plugged the very hole it had made in the hull.</p>
				<p>I would have been deeply in­ter­ested in vis­it­ing this long, 360-league reef, against which the ever-surg­ing sea broke with the fear­some in­ten­sity of thun­der­claps. But just then the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i>’s slant­ing fins took us to great depths, and I could see noth­ing of those high coral walls. I had to rest con­tent with the var­i­ous spec­i­mens of fish brought up by our nets. Among oth­ers I noted some long-finned al­ba­core, a species in the genus <i epub:type="z3998:taxonomy">Scomber</i>, as big as tuna, bluish on the flanks, and streaked with cross­wise stripes that dis­ap­pear when the an­i­mal dies. Th­ese fish fol­lowed us in schools and sup­plied our ta­ble with very dainty flesh. We also caught a large num­ber of yel­low-green gilt­head, half a decime­ter long and tast­ing like do­rado, plus some fly­ing gurnards, au­then­tic un­der­wa­ter swal­lows that, on dark nights, al­ter­nately streak air and wa­ter with their phos­pho­res­cent glim­mers. Among mol­lusks and zoophytes, I found in our trawl’s meshes var­i­ous species of al­cy­onar­ian coral, sea urchins, ham­mer shells, spurred-star shells, wentle­trap snails, horn shells, glass snails. The lo­cal flora was rep­re­sented by fine float­ing al­gae: sea tan­gle, and kelp from the genus <i epub:type="z3998:taxonomy">Macro­cys­tis</i>, sat­u­rated with the mu­cilage their pores per­spire, from which I se­lected a won­der­ful <i epub:type="z3998:taxonomy">Ne­mas­toma geliniaroidea</i>, clas­si­fy­ing it with the nat­u­ral cu­riosi­ties in the mu­seum.</p>
				<p>On Jan­uary 4, two days af­ter cross­ing the Co­ral Sea, we raised the coast of Pa­pua. On this oc­ca­sion Cap­tain Nemo told me that he in­tended to reach the In­dian Ocean via the Tor­res Strait. This was the ex­tent of his re­marks. Ned saw with plea­sure that this course would bring us, once again, closer to Euro­pean seas.</p>
				<p>The Tor­res Strait is re­garded as no less dan­ger­ous for its bristling reefs than for the sav­age in­hab­i­tants of its coasts. It sep­a­rates Queens­land from the huge is­land of Pa­pua, also called New Guinea.</p>
				<p>Pa­pua is 400 leagues long by 130 leagues wide, with a sur­face area of 40,000 ge­o­graphic leagues. It’s lo­cated be­tween lat­i­tude 0° 19′ and 10° 2′ south, and be­tween lon­gi­tude 128° 23′ and 146° 15′. At noon, while the chief of­fi­cer was tak­ing the sun’s al­ti­tude, I spot­ted the sum­mits of the Ar­fak Moun­tains, ris­ing in ter­races and end­ing in sharp peaks.</p>
				<p>Dis­cov­ered in 1511 by the Por­tuguese Fran­cisco Ser­rano, these shores were suc­ces­sively vis­ited by Don Jorge de Me­ne­ses in 1526, by Juan de Gri­jalva in 1527, by the Span­ish gen­eral Al­varo de Saave­dra in 1528, by Inigo Or­tiz in 1545, by the Dutch­man Schouten in 1616, by Ni­co­las Sruick in 1753, by Tas­man, Dampier, Fumel, Carteret, Ed­wards, Bougainville, Cook, McClure, and Thomas For­rest, by Rear Ad­mi­ral d’En­tre­casteaux in 1792, by Louis-Isi­dore Du­per­rey in 1823, and by Cap­tain Du­mont d’Urville in 1827. “It’s the heart­land of the blacks who oc­cupy all Malaysia,” Mr. de Rienzi has said; and I hadn’t the fog­gi­est inkling that sailors’ luck was about to bring me face to face with these daunt­ing An­daman abo­rig­ines.</p>
				<p>So the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i> hove be­fore the en­trance to the world’s most dan­ger­ous strait, a pas­sage­way that even the bold­est nav­i­ga­tors hes­i­tated to clear: the strait that Luis Vaez de Tor­res faced on re­turn­ing from the South Seas in Me­lane­sia, the strait in which sloops of war un­der Cap­tain Du­mont d’Urville ran aground in 1840 and nearly mis­car­ried with all hands. And even the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i>, ris­ing su­pe­rior to ev­ery dan­ger in the sea, was about to be­come in­ti­mate with its coral reefs.</p>
				<p>The Tor­res Strait is about thirty-four leagues wide, but it’s ob­structed by an in­cal­cu­la­ble num­ber of is­lands, islets, break­ers, and rocks that make it nearly im­pos­si­ble to nav­i­gate. Con­se­quently, Cap­tain Nemo took ev­ery de­sired pre­cau­tion in cross­ing it. Float­ing flush with the wa­ter, the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i> moved ahead at a mod­er­ate pace. Like a cetacean’s tail, its pro­pel­ler churned the waves slowly.</p>
				<p>Tak­ing ad­van­tage of this sit­u­a­tion, my two com­pan­ions and I found seats on the ever-de­serted plat­form. In front of us stood the pi­lot­house, and un­less I’m ex­tremely mis­taken, Cap­tain Nemo must have been in­side, steer­ing his <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i> him­self.</p>
				<p>Un­der my eyes I had the ex­cel­lent charts of the Tor­res Strait that had been sur­veyed and drawn up by the hy­dro­graphic en­gi­neer Vin­cen­don Du­moulin and Sublieu­tenant (now Ad­mi­ral) Coupvent-Des­bois, who were part of Du­mont d’Urville’s gen­eral staff dur­ing his fi­nal voy­age to cir­cum­nav­i­gate the globe. Th­ese, along with the ef­forts of Cap­tain King, are the best charts for un­tan­gling the snarl of this nar­row pas­sage­way, and I con­sulted them with scrupu­lous care.</p>
				<p>Around the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i> the sea was boil­ing fu­ri­ously. A stream of waves, bear­ing from south­east to north­west at a speed of two and a half miles per hour, broke over heads of coral emerg­ing here and there.</p>
				<p>“That’s one rough sea!” Ned Land told me.</p>
				<p>“Abom­inable in­deed,” I replied, “and hardly suit­able for a craft like the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i>.”</p>
				<p>“That damned cap­tain,” the Cana­dian went on, “must re­ally be sure of his course, be­cause if these clumps of coral so much as brush us, they’ll rip our hull into a thou­sand pieces!”</p>
				<p>The sit­u­a­tion was in­deed dan­ger­ous, but as if by magic, the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i> seemed to glide right down the mid­dle of these ram­pag­ing reefs. It didn’t fol­low the ex­act course of the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Zeal­ous</i> and the new <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Astro­labe</i>, which had proved so ill-fated for Cap­tain Du­mont d’Urville. It went more to the north, hugged the Mur­ray Is­lands, and re­turned to the south­west near Cum­ber­land Pas­sage. I thought it was about to charge whole­heart­edly into this open­ing, but it went up to the north­west, through a large num­ber of lit­tle-known is­lands and islets, and steered to­ward Tound Is­land and the Bad Chan­nel.</p>
				<p>I was al­ready won­der­ing if Cap­tain Nemo, rash to the point of sheer in­san­ity, wanted his ship to tackle the nar­rows where Du­mont d’Urville’s two sloops of war had gone aground, when he changed di­rec­tion a sec­ond time and cut straight to the west, head­ing to­ward Gue­boroa Is­land.</p>
				<p>By then it was three o’clock in the af­ter­noon. The cur­rent was slack­ing off, it was al­most full tide. The <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i> drew near this is­land, which I can see to this day with its re­mark­able fringe of screw pines. We hugged it from less than two miles out.</p>
				<p>A sud­den jolt threw me down. The <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i> had just struck a reef, and it re­mained mo­tion­less, list­ing slightly to port.</p>
				<p>When I stood up, I saw Cap­tain Nemo and his chief of­fi­cer on the plat­form. They were ex­am­in­ing the ship’s cir­cum­stances, ex­chang­ing a few words in their in­com­pre­hen­si­ble di­alect.</p>
				<p>Here is what those cir­cum­stances en­tailed. Two miles to star­board lay Gue­boroa Is­land, its coast­line curv­ing north to west like an im­mense arm. To the south and east, heads of coral were al­ready on dis­play, left un­cov­ered by the ebbing wa­ters. We had run aground at full tide and in one of those seas whose tides are mod­er­ate, an in­con­ve­nient state of af­fairs for float­ing the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i> off. How­ever, the ship hadn’t suf­fered in any way, so solidly joined was its hull. But al­though it could nei­ther sink nor split open, it was in se­ri­ous dan­ger of be­ing per­ma­nently at­tached to these reefs, and that would have been the fin­ish of Cap­tain Nemo’s sub­mersible.</p>
				<p>I was mulling this over when the cap­tain ap­proached, cool and calm, for­ever in con­trol of him­self, look­ing nei­ther alarmed nor an­noyed.</p>
				<p>“An ac­ci­dent?” I said to him.</p>
				<p>“No, an in­ci­dent,” he an­swered me.</p>
				<p>“But an in­ci­dent,” I replied, “that may oblige you to be­come a res­i­dent again of these shores you avoid!”</p>
				<p>Cap­tain Nemo gave me an odd look and ges­tured no. Which told me pretty clearly that noth­ing would ever force him to set foot on a land mass again. Then he said:</p>
				<p>“No, Pro­fes­sor Aron­nax, the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i> isn’t con­signed to perdi­tion. It will still carry you through the midst of the ocean’s won­ders. Our voy­age is just be­gin­ning, and I’ve no de­sire to de­prive my­self so soon of the plea­sure of your com­pany.”</p>
				<p>“Even so, Cap­tain Nemo,” I went on, ig­nor­ing his ironic turn of phrase, “the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i> has run aground at a mo­ment when the sea is full. Now then, the tides aren’t strong in the Pa­cific, and if you can’t un­bal­last the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i>, which seems im­pos­si­ble to me, I don’t see how it will float off.”</p>
				<p>“You’re right, pro­fes­sor, the Pa­cific tides aren’t strong,” Cap­tain Nemo replied. “But in the Tor­res Strait, one still finds a me­ter-and-a-half dif­fer­ence in level be­tween high and low seas. To­day is Jan­uary 4, and in five days the moon will be full. Now then, I’ll be quite as­ton­ished if that good-na­tured satel­lite doesn’t suf­fi­ciently raise these masses of wa­ter and do me a fa­vor for which I’ll be for­ever grate­ful.”</p>
				<p>This said, Cap­tain Nemo went be­low again to the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i>’s in­te­rior, fol­lowed by his chief of­fi­cer. As for our craft, it no longer stirred, stay­ing as mo­tion­less as if these coral polyps had al­ready walled it in with their in­de­struc­tible ce­ment.</p>
				<p>“Well, sir?” Ned Land said to me, com­ing up af­ter the cap­tain’s de­par­ture.</p>
				<p>“Well, Ned my friend, we’ll serenely wait for the tide on the 9th, be­cause it seems the moon will have the good na­ture to float us away!”</p>
				<p>“As sim­ple as that?”</p>
				<p>“As sim­ple as that.”</p>
				<p>“So our cap­tain isn’t go­ing to drop his an­chors, put his en­gines on the chains, and do any­thing to haul us off?”</p>
				<p>“Since the tide will be suf­fi­cient,” Con­seil replied sim­ply.</p>
				<p>The Cana­dian stared at Con­seil, then he shrugged his shoul­ders. The sea­man in him was talk­ing now.</p>
				<p>“Sir,” he an­swered, “you can trust me when I say this hunk of iron will never nav­i­gate again, on the seas or un­der them. It’s only fit to be sold for its weight. So I think it’s time we gave Cap­tain Nemo the slip.”</p>
				<p>“Ned my friend,” I replied, “un­like you, I haven’t given up on our valiant <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i>, and in four days we’ll know where we stand on these Pa­cific tides. Be­sides, an es­cape at­tempt might be timely if we were in sight of the coasts of Eng­land or Provence, but in the wa­ter­ways of Pa­pua it’s an­other story. And we’ll al­ways have that as a last re­sort if the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i> doesn’t right it­self, which I’d re­gard as a real calamity.”</p>
				<p>“But couldn’t we at least get the lay of the land?” Ned went on. “Here’s an is­land. On this is­land there are trees. Un­der those trees land an­i­mals loaded with cut­lets and roast beef, which I’d be happy to sink my teeth into.”</p>
				<p>“In this in­stance our friend Ned is right,” Con­seil said, “and I side with his views. Couldn’t mas­ter per­suade his friend Cap­tain Nemo to send the three of us ashore, if only so our feet don’t lose the knack of tread­ing on the solid parts of our planet?”</p>
				<p>“I can ask him,” I replied, “but he’ll refuse.”</p>
				<p>“Let mas­ter take the risk,” Con­seil said, “and we’ll know where we stand on the cap­tain’s af­fa­bil­ity.”</p>
				<p>Much to my sur­prise, Cap­tain Nemo gave me the per­mis­sion I asked for, and he did so with grace and alacrity, not even ex­act­ing my prom­ise to re­turn on board. But flee­ing across the New Guinea ter­ri­to­ries would be ex­tremely dan­ger­ous, and I wouldn’t have ad­vised Ned Land to try it. Bet­ter to be pris­on­ers aboard the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i> than to fall into the hands of Pa­puan na­tives.</p>
				<p>The skiff was put at our dis­posal for the next morn­ing. I hardly needed to ask whether Cap­tain Nemo would be com­ing along. I like­wise as­sumed that no crew­men would be as­signed to us, that Ned Land would be in sole charge of pi­lot­ing the long­boat. Be­sides, the shore lay no more than two miles off, and it would be child’s play for the Cana­dian to guide that nim­ble skiff through those rows of reefs so ill-fated for big ships.</p>
				<p>The next day, Jan­uary 5, af­ter its deck pan­el­ing was opened, the skiff was wrenched from its socket and launched to sea from the top of the plat­form. Two men were suf­fi­cient for this op­er­a­tion. The oars were in­side the long­boat and we had only to take our seats.</p>
				<p>At eight o’clock, armed with ri­fles and axes, we pulled clear of the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i>. The sea was fairly calm. A mild breeze blew from shore. In place by the oars, Con­seil and I rowed vig­or­ously, and Ned steered us into the nar­row lanes be­tween the break­ers. The skiff han­dled eas­ily and sped swiftly.</p>
				<p>Ned Land couldn’t con­ceal his glee. He was a pris­oner es­cap­ing from prison and never dream­ing he would need to reen­ter it.</p>
				<p>“Meat!” he kept re­peat­ing. “Now we’ll eat red meat! Ac­tual game! A real mess call, by thun­der! I’m not say­ing fish aren’t good for you, but we mustn’t overdo ’em, and a slice of fresh veni­son grilled over live coals will be a nice change from our stan­dard fare.”</p>
				<p>“You glut­ton,” Con­seil replied, “you’re mak­ing my mouth wa­ter!”</p>
				<p>“It re­mains to be seen,” I said, “whether these forests do con­tain game, and if the types of game aren’t of such size that they can hunt the hunter.”</p>
				<p>“Fine, Pro­fes­sor Aron­nax!” replied the Cana­dian, whose teeth seemed to be as honed as the edge of an ax. “But if there’s no other quadruped on this is­land, I’ll eat tiger—tiger sir­loin.”</p>
				<p>“Our friend Ned grows dis­turb­ing,” Con­seil replied.</p>
				<p>“What­ever it is,” Ned Land went on, “any an­i­mal hav­ing four feet with­out feath­ers, or two feet with feath­ers, will be greeted by my very own one-gun salute.”</p>
				<p>“Oh good!” I replied. “The reck­less Mr. Land is at it again!”</p>
				<p>“Don’t worry, Pro­fes­sor Aron­nax, just keep row­ing!” the Cana­dian replied. “I only need twenty-five min­utes to serve you one of my own spe­cial cre­ations.”</p>
				<p>By 8:30 the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i>’s skiff had just run gen­tly aground on a sandy strand, af­ter suc­cess­fully clear­ing the ring of coral that sur­rounds Gue­boroa Is­land.</p>
			</section>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
