<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="en-US" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: http://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Chapter 5</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="part-2" epub:type="part">
			<section id="chapter-2-5" epub:type="chapter">
				<h3 epub:type="title">
					<span class="first-child" epub:type="z3998:roman">V</span>
					<span class="epub-type-subtitle" epub:type="subtitle">Arabian Tunnel</span>
				</h3>
				<p>The same day, I re­ported to Con­seil and Ned Land that part of the fore­go­ing con­ver­sa­tion di­rectly con­cern­ing them. When I told them we would be ly­ing in Mediter­ranean wa­ters within two days, Con­seil clapped his hands, but the Cana­dian shrugged his shoul­ders.</p>
				<p>“An un­der­wa­ter tun­nel!” he ex­claimed. “A con­nec­tion be­tween two seas! Who ever heard of such malarkey!”</p>
				<p>“Ned my friend,” Con­seil replied, “had you ever heard of the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i>? No, yet here it is! So don’t shrug your shoul­ders so blithely, and don’t dis­count some­thing with the fee­ble ex­cuse that you’ve never heard of it.”</p>
				<p>“We’ll soon see!” Ned Land shot back, shak­ing his head. “After all, I’d like noth­ing bet­ter than to be­lieve in your cap­tain’s lit­tle pas­sage­way, and may Heaven grant it re­ally does take us to the Mediter­ranean.”</p>
				<p>The same evening, at lat­i­tude 21° 30′ north, the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i> was afloat on the sur­face of the sea and draw­ing nearer to the Arab coast. I spot­ted Jidda, an im­por­tant fi­nan­cial cen­ter for Egypt, Syria, Turkey, and the East Indies. I could dis­tin­guish with rea­son­able clar­ity the over­all ef­fect of its build­ings, the ships made fast along its wharves, and those big­ger ves­sels whose draft of wa­ter re­quired them to drop an­chor at the port’s off­shore moor­ing. The sun, fairly low on the hori­zon, struck full force on the houses in this town, ac­cent­ing their white­ness. Out­side the city lim­its, some wood or reed huts in­di­cated the quar­ter where the bedouins lived.</p>
				<p>Soon Jidda faded into the shad­ows of evening, and the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i> went back be­neath the mildly phos­pho­res­cent wa­ters.</p>
				<p>The next day, Fe­bru­ary 10, sev­eral ships ap­peared, run­ning on our op­po­site tack. The <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i> re­sumed its un­der­wa­ter nav­i­gat­ing; but at the mo­ment of our noon sights, the sea was de­serted and the ship rose again to its wa­ter­line.</p>
				<p>With Ned and Con­seil, I went to sit on the plat­form. The coast to the east looked like a slightly blurred mass in a damp fog.</p>
				<p>Lean­ing against the sides of the skiff, we were chat­ting of one thing and an­other, when Ned Land stretched his hand to­ward a point in the wa­ter, say­ing to me:</p>
				<p>“See any­thing out there, pro­fes­sor?”</p>
				<p>“No, Ned,” I replied, “but you know I don’t have your eyes.”</p>
				<p>“Take a good look,” Ned went on. “There, ahead to star­board, al­most level with the bea­con! Don’t you see a mass that seems to be mov­ing around?”</p>
				<p>“Right,” I said af­ter ob­serv­ing care­fully, “I can make out some­thing like a long, black­ish ob­ject on the sur­face of the wa­ter.”</p>
				<p>“A sec­ond <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i>?” Con­seil said.</p>
				<p>“No,” the Cana­dian replied, “un­less I’m badly mis­taken, that’s some ma­rine an­i­mal.”</p>
				<p>“Are there whales in the Red Sea?” Con­seil asked.</p>
				<p>“Yes, my boy,” I replied, “they’re some­times found here.”</p>
				<p>“That’s no whale,” con­tin­ued Ned Land, whose eyes never strayed from the ob­ject they had sighted. “We’re old chums, whales and I, and I couldn’t mis­take their lit­tle ways.”</p>
				<p>“Let’s wait and see,” Con­seil said. “The <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i> is head­ing that di­rec­tion, and we’ll soon know what we’re in for.”</p>
				<p>In fact, that black­ish ob­ject was soon only a mile away from us. It looked like a huge reef stranded in mi­do­cean. What was it? I still couldn’t make up my mind.</p>
				<p>“Oh, it’s mov­ing off! It’s div­ing!” Ned Land ex­claimed. “Dam­na­tion! What can that an­i­mal be? It doesn’t have a forked tail like baleen whales or sperm whales, and its fins look like sawed-off limbs.”</p>
				<p>“But in that case—” I put in.</p>
				<p>“Good lord,” the Cana­dian went on, “it’s rolled over on its back, and it’s rais­ing its breasts in the air!”</p>
				<p>“It’s a siren!” Con­seil ex­claimed. “With all due re­spect to mas­ter, it’s an ac­tual mer­maid!”</p>
				<p>That word “siren” put me back on track, and I re­al­ized that the an­i­mal be­longed to the or­der <i epub:type="z3998:taxonomy">Sire­nia</i>: ma­rine crea­tures that leg­ends have turned into mer­maids, half woman, half fish.</p>
				<p>“No,” I told Con­seil, “that’s no mer­maid, it’s an un­usual crea­ture of which only a few spec­i­mens are left in the Red Sea. That’s a dugong.”</p>
				<p>“Order <i epub:type="z3998:taxonomy">Sire­nia</i>, group <i epub:type="z3998:taxonomy">Pis­ci­forma</i>, sub­class <i epub:type="z3998:taxonomy">Mon­odel­phia</i>, class <i epub:type="z3998:taxonomy">Mam­malia</i>, branch <i epub:type="z3998:taxonomy">Ver­te­brata</i>,” Con­seil replied.</p>
				<p>And when Con­seil has spo­ken, there’s noth­ing else to be said.</p>
				<p>Mean­while Ned Land kept star­ing. His eyes were gleam­ing with de­sire at the sight of that an­i­mal. His hands were ready to hurl a har­poon. You would have thought he was wait­ing for the right mo­ment to jump over­board and at­tack the crea­ture in its own el­e­ment.</p>
				<p>“Oh, sir,” he told me in a voice trem­bling with ex­cite­ment, “I’ve never killed any­thing like <em>that</em>!”</p>
				<p>His whole be­ing was con­cen­trated in this last word.</p>
				<p>Just then Cap­tain Nemo ap­peared on the plat­form. He spot­ted the dugong. He un­der­stood the Cana­dian’s frame of mind and ad­dressed him di­rectly:</p>
				<p>“If you held a har­poon, Mr. Land, wouldn’t your hands be itch­ing to put it to work?”</p>
				<p>“Pos­i­tively, sir.”</p>
				<p>“And just for one day, would it dis­please you to re­turn to your fish­er­man’s trade and add this cetacean to the list of those you’ve al­ready hunted down?”</p>
				<p>“It wouldn’t dis­please me one bit.”</p>
				<p>“All right, you can try your luck!”</p>
				<p>“Thank you, sir,” Ned Land replied, his eyes ablaze.</p>
				<p>“Only,” the cap­tain went on, “I urge you to aim care­fully at this an­i­mal, in your own per­sonal in­ter­est.”</p>
				<p>“Is the dugong dan­ger­ous to at­tack?” I asked, de­spite the Cana­dian’s shrug of the shoul­ders.</p>
				<p>“Yes, some­times,” the cap­tain replied. “Th­ese an­i­mals have been known to turn on their as­sailants and cap­size their long­boats. But with Mr. Land that dan­ger isn’t to be feared. His eye is sharp, his arm is sure. If I rec­om­mend that he aim care­fully at this dugong, it’s be­cause the an­i­mal is justly re­garded as fine game, and I know Mr. Land doesn’t de­spise a choice morsel.”</p>
				<p>“Aha!” the Cana­dian put in. “This beast of­fers the added lux­ury of be­ing good to eat?”</p>
				<p>“Yes, Mr. Land. Its flesh is ac­tual red meat, highly prized, and set aside through­out Malaysia for the ta­bles of aris­to­crats. Ac­cord­ingly, this ex­cel­lent an­i­mal has been hunted so blood­thirstily that, like its man­a­tee rel­a­tives, it has be­come more and more scarce.”</p>
				<p>“In that case, cap­tain,” Con­seil said in all se­ri­ous­ness, “on the of­fchance that this crea­ture might be the last of its line, wouldn’t it be ad­vis­able to spare its life, in the in­ter­ests of sci­ence?”</p>
				<p>“Maybe,” the Cana­dian an­swered, “it would be bet­ter to hunt it down, in the in­ter­ests of meal­time.”</p>
				<p>“Then pro­ceed, Mr. Land,” Cap­tain Nemo replied.</p>
				<p>Just then, as mute and emo­tion­less as ever, seven crew­men climbed onto the plat­form. One car­ried a har­poon and line sim­i­lar to those used in whale fish­ing. Its deck pan­el­ing opened, the skiff was wrenched from its socket and launched to sea. Six row­ers sat on the thwarts, and the coxswain took the tiller. Ned, Con­seil, and I found seats in the stern.</p>
				<p>“Aren’t you com­ing, cap­tain?” I asked.</p>
				<p>“No, sir, but I wish you happy hunt­ing.”</p>
				<p>The skiff pulled clear, and car­ried off by its six oars, it headed swiftly to­ward the dugong, which by then was float­ing two miles from the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i>.</p>
				<p>Ar­riv­ing within a few ca­ble lengths of the cetacean, our long­boat slowed down, and the sculls dipped noise­lessly into the tran­quil wa­ters. Har­poon in hand, Ned Land went to take his stand in the skiff’s bow. Har­poons used for hunt­ing whales are usu­ally at­tached to a very long rope that pays out quickly when the wounded an­i­mal drags it with him. But this rope mea­sured no more than about ten fath­oms, and its end had sim­ply been fas­tened to a small bar­rel that, while float­ing, would in­di­cate the dugong’s move­ments be­neath the wa­ters.</p>
				<p>I stood up and could clearly ob­serve the Cana­dian’s ad­ver­sary. This dugong—which also boasts the name hal­icore—closely re­sem­bled a man­a­tee. Its ob­long body ended in a very long cau­dal fin and its lat­eral fins in ac­tual fin­gers. It dif­fers from the man­a­tee in that its up­per jaw is armed with two long, pointed teeth that form di­verg­ing tusks on ei­ther side.</p>
				<p>This dugong that Ned Land was pre­par­ing to at­tack was of colos­sal di­men­sions, eas­ily ex­ceed­ing seven me­ters in length. It didn’t stir and seemed to be sleep­ing on the sur­face of the waves, a cir­cum­stance that should have made it eas­ier to cap­ture.</p>
				<p>The skiff ap­proached cau­tiously to within three fath­oms of the an­i­mal. The oars hung sus­pended above their rowlocks. I was crouch­ing. His body lean­ing slightly back, Ned Land bran­dished his har­poon with ex­pert hands.</p>
				<p>Sud­denly a hiss­ing sound was au­di­ble, and the dugong dis­ap­peared. Although the har­poon had been force­fully hurled, it ap­par­ently had hit only wa­ter.</p>
				<p>“Dam­na­tion!” ex­claimed the fu­ri­ous Cana­dian. “I missed it!”</p>
				<p>“No,” I said, “the an­i­mal’s wounded, there’s its blood; but your weapon didn’t stick in its body.”</p>
				<p>“My har­poon! Get my har­poon!” Ned Land ex­claimed.</p>
				<p>The sailors went back to their sculling, and the coxswain steered the long­boat to­ward the float­ing bar­rel. We fished up the har­poon, and the skiff started off in pur­suit of the an­i­mal.</p>
				<p>The lat­ter re­turned from time to time to breathe at the sur­face of the sea. Its wound hadn’t weak­ened it be­cause it went with tremen­dous speed. Driven by en­er­getic arms, the long­boat flew on its trail. Sev­eral times we got within a few fath­oms of it, and the Cana­dian hov­ered in readi­ness to strike; but then the dugong would steal away with a sud­den dive, and it proved im­pos­si­ble to over­take the beast.</p>
				<p>I’ll let you as­sess the de­gree of anger con­sum­ing our im­pa­tient Ned Land. He hurled at the hap­less an­i­mal the most po­tent swear­words in the English lan­guage. For my part, I was sim­ply dis­tressed to see this dugong out­wit our ev­ery scheme.</p>
				<p>We chased it un­flag­gingly for a full hour, and I’d be­gun to think it would prove too dif­fi­cult to cap­ture, when the an­i­mal got the un­timely idea of tak­ing re­venge on us, a no­tion it would soon have cause to re­gret. It wheeled on the skiff, to as­sault us in its turn.</p>
				<p>This ma­neu­ver did not es­cape the Cana­dian.</p>
				<p>“Watch out!” he said.</p>
				<p>The coxswain pro­nounced a few words in his bizarre lan­guage, and no doubt he alerted his men to keep on their guard.</p>
				<p>Ar­riv­ing within twenty feet of the skiff, the dugong stopped, sharply sniff­ing the air with its huge nos­trils, pierced not at the tip of its muz­zle but on its top­side. Then it gath­ered it­self and sprang at us.</p>
				<p>The skiff couldn’t avoid the col­li­sion. Half over­turned, it shipped a ton or two of wa­ter that we had to bail out. But thanks to our skill­ful coxswain, we were fouled on the bias rather than broad­side, so we didn’t cap­size. Cling­ing to the stem­post, Ned Land thrust his har­poon again and again into the gi­gan­tic an­i­mal, which imbed­ded its teeth in our gun­wale and lifted the long­boat out of the wa­ter as a lion would lift a deer. We were thrown on top of each other, and I have no idea how the ven­ture would have ended had not the Cana­dian, still thirst­ing for the beast’s blood, fi­nally pierced it to the heart.</p>
				<p>I heard its teeth grind on sheet iron, and the dugong dis­ap­peared, tak­ing our har­poon along with it. But the bar­rel soon popped up on the sur­face, and a few mo­ments later the an­i­mal’s body ap­peared and rolled over on its back. Our skiff re­joined it, took it in tow, and headed to the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i>.</p>
				<p>It took pul­leys of great strength to hoist this dugong onto the plat­form. The beast weighed 5,000 kilo­grams. It was carved up in sight of the Cana­dian, who re­mained to watch ev­ery de­tail of the op­er­a­tion. At din­ner the same day, my stew­ard served me some slices of this flesh, skill­fully dressed by the ship’s cook. I found it ex­cel­lent, even bet­ter than veal if not beef.</p>
				<p>The next morn­ing, Fe­bru­ary 11, the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i>’s pantry was en­riched by more dainty game. A covey of terns alighted on the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i>. They were a species of <i epub:type="z3998:taxonomy">Sterna nilot­ica</i> unique to Egypt: beak black, head gray and stip­pled, eyes sur­rounded by white dots, back, wings, and tail gray­ish, belly and throat white, feet red. Also caught were a cou­ple dozen Nile duck, su­pe­rior-tast­ing wild­fowl whose neck and crown of the head are white speck­led with black.</p>
				<p>By then the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i> had re­duced speed. It moved ahead at a saunter, so to speak. I ob­served that the Red Sea’s wa­ter was be­com­ing less salty the closer we got to Suez.</p>
				<p>Near five o’clock in the af­ter­noon, we sighted Cape Ras Mo­hammed to the north. This cape forms the tip of Ara­bia Pe­traea, which lies be­tween the Gulf of Suez and the Gulf of Aqaba.</p>
				<p>The <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i> en­tered the Strait of Jubal, which leads to the Gulf of Suez. I could clearly make out a high moun­tain crown­ing Ras Mo­hammed be­tween the two gulfs. It was Mt. Horeb, that bib­li­cal Mt. Si­nai on whose sum­mit Moses met God face to face, that sum­mit the mind’s eye al­ways pic­tures as wreathed in light­ning.</p>
				<p>At six o’clock, some­times afloat and some­times sub­merged, the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i> passed well out from El Tur, which sat at the far end of a bay whose wa­ters seemed to be dyed red, as Cap­tain Nemo had al­ready men­tioned. Then night fell in the midst of a heavy si­lence oc­ca­sion­ally bro­ken by the calls of pel­i­cans and noc­tur­nal birds, by the sound of surf chaf­ing against rocks, or by the dis­tant moan of a steamer churn­ing the waves of the gulf with noisy blades.</p>
				<p>From eight to nine o’clock, the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i> stayed a few me­ters be­neath the wa­ters. Ac­cord­ing to my cal­cu­la­tions, we had to be quite close to Suez. Through the pan­els in the lounge, I spot­ted rocky bot­toms brightly lit by our elec­tric rays. It seemed to me that the strait was get­ting nar­rower and nar­rower.</p>
				<p>At 9:15 when our boat re­turned to the sur­face, I climbed onto the plat­form. I was quite im­pa­tient to clear Cap­tain Nemo’s tun­nel, couldn’t sit still, and wanted to breathe the fresh night air.</p>
				<p>Soon, in the shad­ows, I spot­ted a pale sig­nal light glim­mer­ing a mile away, half dis­col­ored by mist.</p>
				<p>“A float­ing light­house,” said some­one next to me.</p>
				<p>I turned and dis­cov­ered the cap­tain.</p>
				<p>“That’s the float­ing sig­nal light of Suez,” he went on. “It won’t be long be­fore we reach the en­trance to the tun­nel.”</p>
				<p>“It can’t be very easy to en­ter it.”</p>
				<p>“No, sir. Ac­cord­ingly, I’m in the habit of stay­ing in the pi­lot­house and di­rect­ing ma­neu­vers my­self. And now if you’ll kindly go be­low, Pro­fes­sor Aron­nax, the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i> is about to sink be­neath the waves, and it will only re­turn to the sur­face af­ter we’ve cleared the Ara­bian Tun­nel.”</p>
				<p>I fol­lowed Cap­tain Nemo. The hatch closed, the bal­last tanks filled with wa­ter, and the sub­mersible sank some ten me­ters down.</p>
				<p>Just as I was about to re­pair to my state­room, the cap­tain stopped me.</p>
				<p>“Pro­fes­sor,” he said to me, “would you like to go with me to the wheel­house?”</p>
				<p>“I was afraid to ask,” I replied.</p>
				<p>“Come along, then. This way, you’ll learn the full story about this com­bi­na­tion un­der­wa­ter and un­der­ground nav­i­gat­ing.”</p>
				<p>Cap­tain Nemo led me to the cen­tral com­pan­ion­way. In mid­stair he opened a door, went along the up­per gang­ways, and ar­rived at the wheel­house, which, as you know, stands at one end of the plat­form.</p>
				<p>It was a cabin mea­sur­ing six feet square and closely re­sem­bling those oc­cu­pied by the helms­men of steam­boats on the Mis­sis­sippi or Hud­son rivers. In the cen­ter stood an up­right wheel geared to rud­der ca­bles run­ning to the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i>’s stern. Set in the cabin’s walls were four dead­lights, win­dows of bi­con­vex glass that en­abled the man at the helm to see in ev­ery di­rec­tion.</p>
				<p>The cabin was dark; but my eyes soon grew ac­cus­tomed to its dark­ness and I saw the pi­lot, a mus­cu­lar man whose hands rested on the pegs of the wheel. Out­side, the sea was brightly lit by the bea­con shin­ing be­hind the cabin at the other end of the plat­form.</p>
				<p>“Now,” Cap­tain Nemo said, “let’s look for our pas­sage­way.”</p>
				<p>Elec­tric wires linked the pi­lot­house with the en­gine room, and from this cabin the cap­tain could si­mul­ta­ne­ously sig­nal head­ing and speed to his <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i>. He pressed a metal but­ton and at once the pro­pel­ler slowed down sig­nif­i­cantly.</p>
				<p>I stared in si­lence at the high, sheer wall we were skirt­ing just then, the firm base of the sandy moun­tains on the coast. For an hour we went along it in this fash­ion, stay­ing only a few me­ters away. Cap­tain Nemo never took his eyes off the two con­cen­tric cir­cles of the com­pass hang­ing in the cabin. At a mere ges­ture from him, the helms­man would in­stantly change the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i>’s head­ing.</p>
				<p>Stand­ing by the port dead­light, I spot­ted mag­nif­i­cent coral sub­struc­tures, zoophytes, al­gae, and crus­taceans with enor­mous quiv­er­ing claws that stretched forth from crevices in the rock.</p>
				<p>At 10:15 Cap­tain Nemo him­self took the helm. Dark and deep, a wide gallery opened ahead of us. The <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i> was brazenly swal­lowed up. Strange rum­blings were au­di­ble along our sides. It was the wa­ter of the Red Sea, hurled to­ward the Mediter­ranean by the tun­nel’s slope. Our en­gines tried to of­fer re­sis­tance by churn­ing the waves with pro­pel­ler in re­verse, but the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i> went with the tor­rent, as swift as an ar­row.</p>
				<p>Along the nar­row walls of this pas­sage­way, I saw only bril­liant streaks, hard lines, fiery fur­rows, all scrawled by our speed­ing elec­tric light. With my hand I tried to curb the pound­ing of my heart.</p>
				<p>At 10:35 Cap­tain Nemo left the steer­ing wheel and turned to me:</p>
				<p>“The Mediter­ranean,” he told me.</p>
				<p>In less than twenty min­utes, swept along by the tor­rent, the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i> had just cleared the Isth­mus of Suez.</p>
			</section>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
