<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="en-US" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: http://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Chapter 12</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="part-2" epub:type="part">
			<section id="chapter-2-12" epub:type="chapter">
				<h3 epub:type="title">
					<span class="first-child" epub:type="z3998:roman">XII</span>
					<span class="epub-type-subtitle" epub:type="subtitle">Sperm Whales and Baleen Whales</span>
				</h3>
				<p>Dur­ing the night of March 13–14, the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i> re­sumed its south­ward head­ing. Once it was abreast of Cape Horn, I thought it would strike west of the cape, make for Pa­cific seas, and com­plete its tour of the world. It did noth­ing of the sort and kept mov­ing to­ward the south­ern­most re­gions. So where was it bound? The pole? That was in­san­ity. I was be­gin­ning to think that the cap­tain’s reck­less­ness more than jus­ti­fied Ned Land’s worst fears.</p>
				<p>For a good while the Cana­dian had said noth­ing more to me about his es­cape plans. He had be­come less so­cia­ble, al­most sullen. I could see how heav­ily this pro­tracted im­pris­on­ment was weigh­ing on him. I could feel the anger build­ing in him. When­ever he en­coun­tered the cap­tain, his eyes would flicker with dark fire, and I was in con­stant dread that his nat­u­ral ve­he­mence would cause him to do some­thing rash.</p>
				<p>That day, March 14, he and Con­seil man­aged to find me in my state­room. I asked them the pur­pose of their visit.</p>
				<p>“To put a sim­ple ques­tion to you, sir,” the Cana­dian an­swered me.</p>
				<p>“Go on, Ned.”</p>
				<p>“How many men do you think are on board the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i>?”</p>
				<p>“I’m un­able to say, my friend.”</p>
				<p>“It seems to me,” Ned Land went on, “that it wouldn’t take much of a crew to run a ship like this one.”</p>
				<p>“Cor­rect,” I replied. “Un­der ex­ist­ing con­di­tions some ten men at the most should be enough to op­er­ate it.”</p>
				<p>“All right,” the Cana­dian said, “then why should there be any more than that?”</p>
				<p>“Why?” I an­swered.</p>
				<p>I stared at Ned Land, whose mo­tives were easy to guess.</p>
				<p>“Be­cause,” I said, “if I can trust my hunches, if I truly un­der­stand the cap­tain’s way of life, his <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i> isn’t sim­ply a ship. It’s meant to be a refuge for peo­ple like its com­man­der, peo­ple who have sev­ered all ties with the shore.”</p>
				<p>“Per­haps,” Con­seil said, “but in a nut­shell, the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i> can hold only a cer­tain num­ber of men, so couldn’t mas­ter es­ti­mate their max­i­mum?”</p>
				<p>“How, Con­seil?”</p>
				<p>“By cal­cu­lat­ing it. Master is fa­mil­iar with the ship’s ca­pac­ity, hence the amount of air it con­tains; on the other hand, mas­ter knows how much air each man con­sumes in the act of breath­ing, and he can com­pare this data with the fact that the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i> must rise to the sur­face ev­ery twenty-four hours …”</p>
				<p>Con­seil didn’t fin­ish his sen­tence, but I could eas­ily see what he was driv­ing at.</p>
				<p>“I fol­low you,” I said. “But while they’re sim­ple to do, such cal­cu­la­tions can give only a very un­cer­tain fig­ure.”</p>
				<p>“No prob­lem,” the Cana­dian went on in­sis­tently.</p>
				<p>“Then here’s how to cal­cu­late it,” I replied. “In one hour each man con­sumes the oxy­gen con­tained in 100 liters of air, hence dur­ing twenty-four hours the oxy­gen con­tained in 2,400 liters. There­fore, we must look for the mul­ti­ple of 2,400 liters of air that gives us the amount found in the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i>.”</p>
				<p>“Pre­cisely,” Con­seil said.</p>
				<p>“Now then,” I went on, “the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i>’s ca­pac­ity is 1,500 met­ric tons, and that of a ton is 1,000 liters, so the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i> holds 1,500,000 liters of air, which, di­vided by 2,400 …”</p>
				<p>I did a quick pen­cil cal­cu­la­tion.</p>
				<p>“… gives us the quo­tient of 625. Which is tan­ta­mount to say­ing that the air con­tained in the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i> would be ex­actly enough for 625 men over twenty-four hours.”</p>
				<p>“625!” Ned re­peated.</p>
				<p>“But rest as­sured,” I added, “that be­tween pas­sen­gers, sea­men, or of­fi­cers, we don’t to­tal one-tenth of that fig­ure.”</p>
				<p>“Which is still too many for three men!” Con­seil mut­tered.</p>
				<p>“So, my poor Ned, I can only coun­sel pa­tience.”</p>
				<p>“And,” Con­seil replied, “even more than pa­tience, res­ig­na­tion.”</p>
				<p>Con­seil had said the true word.</p>
				<p>“Even so,” he went on, “Cap­tain Nemo can’t go south for­ever! He’ll surely have to stop, if only at the Ice Bank, and he’ll re­turn to the seas of civ­i­liza­tion! Then it will be time to re­sume Ned Land’s plans.”</p>
				<p>The Cana­dian shook his head, passed his hand over his brow, made no re­ply, and left us.</p>
				<p>“With mas­ter’s per­mis­sion, I’ll make an ob­ser­va­tion to him,” Con­seil then told me. “Our poor Ned broods about all the things he can’t have. He’s haunted by his for­mer life. He seems to miss ev­ery­thing that’s de­nied us. He’s ob­sessed by his old mem­o­ries and it’s break­ing his heart. We must un­der­stand him. What does he have to oc­cupy him here? Noth­ing. He isn’t a sci­en­tist like mas­ter, and he doesn’t share our en­thu­si­asm for the sea’s won­ders. He would risk any­thing just to en­ter a tav­ern in his own coun­try!”</p>
				<p>To be sure, the monotony of life on board must have seemed un­bear­able to the Cana­dian, who was ac­cus­tomed to free­dom and ac­tiv­ity. It was a rare event that could ex­cite him. That day, how­ever, a de­vel­op­ment oc­curred that re­minded him of his happy years as a har­pooner.</p>
				<p>Near eleven o’clock in the morn­ing, while on the sur­face of the ocean, the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i> fell in with a herd of baleen whales. This en­counter didn’t sur­prise me, be­cause I knew these an­i­mals were be­ing hunted so re­lent­lessly that they took refuge in the ocean basins of the high lat­i­tudes.</p>
				<p>In the mar­itime world and in the realm of ge­o­graphic ex­plo­ration, whales have played a ma­jor role. This is the an­i­mal that first dragged the Basques in its wake, then As­turian Spa­niards, English­men, and Dutch­men, em­bold­en­ing them against the ocean’s per­ils, and lead­ing them to the ends of the earth. Baleen whales like to fre­quent the south­ern­most and north­ern­most seas. Old leg­ends even claim that these cetaceans led fish­er­men to within a mere seven leagues of the North Pole. Although this feat is fic­ti­tious, it will some­day come true, be­cause it’s likely that by hunt­ing whales in the Arc­tic or Antarc­tic re­gions, man will fi­nally reach this un­known spot on the globe.</p>
				<p>We were seated on the plat­form next to a tran­quil sea. The month of March, since it’s the equiv­a­lent of Oc­to­ber in these lat­i­tudes, was giv­ing us some fine au­tumn days. It was the Cana­dian—on this topic he was never mis­taken—who sighted a baleen whale on the east­ern hori­zon. If you looked care­fully, you could see its black­ish back al­ter­nately rise and fall above the waves, five miles from the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i>.</p>
				<p>“Wow!” Ned Land ex­claimed. “If I were on board a whaler, there’s an en­counter that would be great fun! That’s one big an­i­mal! Look how high its blow­holes are spout­ing all that air and steam! Dam­na­tion! Why am I chained to this hunk of sheet iron!”</p>
				<p>“Why, Ned!” I replied. “You still aren’t over your old fish­ing urges?”</p>
				<p>“How could a whale fish­er­man for­get his old trade, sir? Who could ever get tired of such ex­cit­ing hunt­ing?”</p>
				<p>“You’ve never fished these seas, Ned?”</p>
				<p>“Never, sir. Just the north­ern­most seas, equally in the Ber­ing Strait and the Davis Strait.”</p>
				<p>“So the south­ern right whale is still un­known to you. Un­til now it’s the bow­head whale you’ve hunted, and it won’t risk go­ing past the warm wa­ters of the equa­tor.”</p>
				<p>“Oh, pro­fes­sor, what are you feed­ing me?” the Cana­dian an­swered in a tol­er­a­bly skep­ti­cal tone.</p>
				<p>“I’m feed­ing you the facts.”</p>
				<p>“By thun­der! In ’65, just two and a half years ago, I to whom you speak, I my­self stepped onto the car­cass of a whale near Green­land, and its flank still car­ried the marked har­poon of a whal­ing ship from the Ber­ing Sea. Now I ask you, af­ter it had been wounded west of Amer­ica, how could this an­i­mal be killed in the east, un­less it had cleared the equa­tor and dou­bled Cape Horn or the Cape of Good Hope?”</p>
				<p>“I agree with our friend Ned,” Con­seil said, “and I’m wait­ing to hear how mas­ter will re­ply to him.”</p>
				<p>“Master will re­ply, my friends, that baleen whales are lo­cal­ized, ac­cord­ing to species, within cer­tain seas that they never leave. And if one of these an­i­mals went from the Ber­ing Strait to the Davis Strait, it’s quite sim­ply be­cause there’s some pas­sage­way from the one sea to the other, ei­ther along the coasts of Canada or Siberia.”</p>
				<p>“You ex­pect us to fall for that?” the Cana­dian asked, tip­ping me a wink.</p>
				<p>“If mas­ter says so,” Con­seil replied.</p>
				<p>“Which means,” the Cana­dian went on, “since I’ve never fished these wa­ter­ways, I don’t know the whales that fre­quent them?”</p>
				<p>“That’s what I’ve been telling you, Ned.”</p>
				<p>“All the more rea­son to get to know them,” Con­seil an­swered.</p>
				<p>“Look! Look!” the Cana­dian ex­claimed, his voice full of ex­cite­ment. “It’s ap­proach­ing! It’s com­ing to­ward us! It’s thumb­ing its nose at me! It knows I can’t do a blessed thing to it!”</p>
				<p>Ned stamped his foot. Bran­dish­ing an imag­i­nary har­poon, his hands pos­i­tively trem­bled.</p>
				<p>“Th­ese cetaceans,” he asked, “are they as big as the ones in the north­ern­most seas?”</p>
				<p>“Pretty nearly, Ned.”</p>
				<p>“Be­cause I’ve seen big baleen whales, sir, whales mea­sur­ing up to 100 feet long! I’ve even heard that those rorqual whales off the Aleu­tian Is­lands some­times get over 150 feet.”</p>
				<p>“That strikes me as ex­ag­ger­ated,” I replied. “Those an­i­mals are only mem­bers of the genus <i epub:type="z3998:taxonomy">Balaenoptera</i> fur­nished with dor­sal fins, and like sperm whales, they’re gen­er­ally smaller than the bow­head whale.”</p>
				<p>“Oh!” ex­claimed the Cana­dian, whose eyes hadn’t left the ocean. “It’s get­ting closer, it’s com­ing into the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i>’s wa­ters!”</p>
				<p>Then, go­ing on with his con­ver­sa­tion:</p>
				<p>“You talk about sperm whales,” he said, “as if they were lit­tle beasts! But there are sto­ries of gi­gan­tic sperm whales. They’re shrewd cetaceans. I hear that some will cover them­selves with al­gae and fu­cus plants. Peo­ple mis­take them for islets. They pitch camp on top, make them­selves at home, light a fire—”</p>
				<p>“Build houses,” Con­seil said.</p>
				<p>“Yes, funny man,” Ned Land replied. “Then one fine day the an­i­mal dives and drags all its oc­cu­pants down into the depths.”</p>
				<p>“Like in the voy­ages of Sin­bad the Sailor,” I an­swered, laugh­ing. “Oh, Mr. Land, you’re ad­dicted to tall tales! What sperm whales you’re hand­ing us! I hope you don’t re­ally be­lieve in them!”</p>
				<p>“Mr. Nat­u­ral­ist,” the Cana­dian replied in all se­ri­ous­ness, “when it comes to whales, you can be­lieve any­thing! (Look at that one move! Look at it steal­ing away!) Peo­ple claim these an­i­mals can cir­cle around the world in just fif­teen days.”</p>
				<p>“I don’t say nay.”</p>
				<p>“But what you un­doubt­edly don’t know, Pro­fes­sor Aron­nax, is that at the be­gin­ning of the world, whales trav­eled even quicker.”</p>
				<p>“Oh re­ally, Ned! And why so?”</p>
				<p>“Be­cause in those days their tails moved side to side, like those on fish, in other words, their tails were straight up, thrash­ing the wa­ter from left to right, right to left. But spot­ting that they swam too fast, our Creator twisted their tails, and ever since they’ve been thrash­ing the waves up and down, at the ex­pense of their speed.”</p>
				<p>“Fine, Ned,” I said, then res­ur­rected one of the Cana­dian’s ex­pres­sions. “You ex­pect us to fall for that?”</p>
				<p>“Not too ter­ri­bly,” Ned Land replied, “and no more than if I told you there are whales that are 300 feet long and weigh 1,000,000 pounds.”</p>
				<p>“That’s in­deed con­sid­er­able,” I said. “But you must ad­mit that cer­tain cetaceans do grow to sig­nif­i­cant size, since they’re said to sup­ply as much as 120 met­ric tons of oil.”</p>
				<p>“That I’ve seen,” the Cana­dian said.</p>
				<p>“I can eas­ily be­lieve it, Ned, just as I can be­lieve that cer­tain baleen whales equal 100 ele­phants in bulk. Imag­ine the im­pact of such a mass if it were launched at full speed!”</p>
				<p>“Is it true,” Con­seil asked, “that they can sink ships?”</p>
				<p>“Ships? I doubt it,” I replied. “How­ever, they say that in 1820, right in these south­ern seas, a baleen whale rushed at the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Es­sex</i> and pushed it back­ward at a speed of four me­ters per sec­ond. Its stern was flooded, and the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Es­sex</i> went down fast.”</p>
				<p>Ned looked at me with a ban­ter­ing ex­pres­sion.</p>
				<p>“Speak­ing for my­self,” he said, “I once got wal­loped by a whale’s tail—in my long­boat, need­less to say. My com­pan­ions and I were launched to an al­ti­tude of six me­ters. But next to the pro­fes­sor’s whale, mine was just a baby.”</p>
				<p>“Do these an­i­mals live a long time?” Con­seil asked.</p>
				<p>“A thou­sand years,” the Cana­dian replied with­out hes­i­ta­tion.</p>
				<p>“And how, Ned,” I asked, “do you know that’s so?”</p>
				<p>“Be­cause peo­ple say so.”</p>
				<p>“And why do peo­ple say so?”</p>
				<p>“Be­cause peo­ple know so.”</p>
				<p>“No, Ned! Peo­ple don’t know so, they sup­pose so, and here’s the logic with which they back up their be­liefs. When fish­er­men first hunted whales 400 years ago, these an­i­mals grew to big­ger sizes than they do to­day. Rea­son­ably enough, it’s as­sumed that to­day’s whales are smaller be­cause they haven’t had time to reach their full growth. That’s why the Count de Buf­fon’s en­cy­clo­pe­dia says that cetaceans can live, and even must live, for a thou­sand years. You un­der­stand?”</p>
				<p>Ned Land didn’t un­der­stand. He no longer even heard me. That baleen whale kept com­ing closer. His eyes de­voured it.</p>
				<p>“Oh!” he ex­claimed. “It’s not just one whale, it’s ten, twenty, a whole gam! And I can’t do a thing! I’m tied hand and foot!”</p>
				<p>“But Ned my friend,” Con­seil said, “why not ask Cap­tain Nemo for per­mis­sion to hunt—”</p>
				<p>Be­fore Con­seil could fin­ish his sen­tence, Ned Land scooted down the hatch and ran to look for the cap­tain. A few mo­ments later, the two of them reap­peared on the plat­form.</p>
				<p>Cap­tain Nemo ob­served the herd of cetaceans ca­vort­ing on the wa­ters a mile from the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i>.</p>
				<p>“They’re south­ern right whales,” he said. “There goes the for­tune of a whole whal­ing fleet.”</p>
				<p>“Well, sir,” the Cana­dian asked, “couldn’t I hunt them, just so I don’t for­get my old har­poon­ing trade?”</p>
				<p>“Hunt them? What for?” Cap­tain Nemo replied. “Sim­ply to de­stroy them? We have no use for whale oil on this ship.”</p>
				<p>“But, sir,” the Cana­dian went on, “in the Red Sea you au­tho­rized us to chase a dugong!”</p>
				<p>“There it was an is­sue of ob­tain­ing fresh meat for my crew. Here it would be killing for the sake of killing. I’m well aware that’s a priv­i­lege re­served for mankind, but I don’t al­low such mur­der­ous pas­times. When your peers, Mr. Land, de­stroy de­cent, harm­less crea­tures like the south­ern right whale or the bow­head whale, they com­mit a rep­re­hen­si­ble of­fense. Thus they’ve al­ready de­pop­u­lated all of Baf­fin Bay, and they’ll wipe out a whole class of use­ful an­i­mals. So leave these poor cetaceans alone. They have quite enough nat­u­ral en­e­mies, such as sperm whales, sword­fish, and saw­fish, with­out you med­dling with them.”</p>
				<p>I’ll let the reader de­cide what faces the Cana­dian made dur­ing this lec­ture on hunt­ing ethics. Fur­nish­ing such ar­gu­ments to a pro­fes­sional har­pooner was a waste of words. Ned Land stared at Cap­tain Nemo and ob­vi­ously missed his mean­ing. But the cap­tain was right. Thanks to the mind­less, bar­baric blood­thirsti­ness of fish­er­men, the last baleen whale will some­day dis­ap­pear from the ocean.</p>
				<p>Ned Land whis­tled “Yan­kee Doo­dle” be­tween his teeth, stuffed his hands in his pock­ets, and turned his back on us.</p>
				<p>Mean­while Cap­tain Nemo stud­ied the herd of cetaceans, then ad­dressed me:</p>
				<p>“I was right to claim that baleen whales have enough nat­u­ral en­e­mies with­out count­ing man. Th­ese spec­i­mens will soon have to deal with mighty op­po­nents. Eight miles to lee­ward, Pro­fes­sor Aron­nax, can you see those black­ish specks mov­ing about?”</p>
				<p>“Yes, cap­tain,” I replied.</p>
				<p>“Those are sperm whales, dread­ful an­i­mals that I’ve some­times en­coun­tered in herds of 200 or 300! As for them, they’re cruel, de­struc­tive beasts, and they de­serve to be ex­ter­mi­nated.”</p>
				<p>The Cana­dian turned swiftly at these last words.</p>
				<p>“Well, cap­tain,” I said, “on be­half of the baleen whales, there’s still time—”</p>
				<p>“It’s point­less to run any risks, pro­fes­sor. The <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i> will suf­fice to dis­perse these sperm whales. It’s armed with a steel spur quite equal to Mr. Land’s har­poon, I imag­ine.”</p>
				<p>The Cana­dian didn’t even bother shrug­ging his shoul­ders. At­tack­ing cetaceans with thrusts from a spur! Who ever heard of such malarkey!</p>
				<p>“Wait and see, Pro­fes­sor Aron­nax,” Cap­tain Nemo said. “We’ll show you a style of hunt­ing with which you aren’t yet fa­mil­iar. We’ll take no pity on these fe­ro­cious cetaceans. They’re merely mouth and teeth!”</p>
				<p>Mouth and teeth! There’s no bet­ter way to de­scribe the long-skulled sperm whale, whose length some­times ex­ceeds twenty-five me­ters. The enor­mous head of this cetacean oc­cu­pies about a third of its body. Bet­ter armed than a baleen whale, whose up­per jaw is adorned solely with whale­bone, the sperm whale is equipped with twenty-five huge teeth that are twenty cen­time­ters high, have cylin­dri­cal, con­i­cal sum­mits, and weigh two pounds each. In the top part of this enor­mous head, in­side big cav­i­ties sep­a­rated by car­ti­lage, you’ll find 300 to 400 kilo­grams of that valu­able oil called <i>sper­ma­ceti</i>. The sperm whale is an awk­ward an­i­mal, more tad­pole than fish, as Pro­fes­sor Fré­dol has noted. It’s poorly con­structed, be­ing “de­fec­tive,” so to speak, over the whole left side of its frame, with good eye­sight only in its right eye.</p>
				<p>Mean­while that mon­strous herd kept com­ing closer. It had seen the baleen whales and was pre­par­ing to at­tack. You could tell in ad­vance that the sperm whales would be vic­to­ri­ous, not only be­cause they were bet­ter built for fight­ing than their harm­less ad­ver­saries, but also be­cause they could stay longer un­der­wa­ter be­fore re­turn­ing to breathe at the sur­face.</p>
				<p>There was just time to run to the res­cue of the baleen whales. The <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i> pro­ceeded to mid­wa­ter. Con­seil, Ned, and I sat in front of the lounge win­dows. Cap­tain Nemo made his way to the helms­man’s side to op­er­ate his sub­mersible as an en­gine of de­struc­tion. Soon I felt the beats of our pro­pel­ler get­ting faster, and we picked up speed.</p>
				<p>The bat­tle be­tween sperm whales and baleen whales had al­ready be­gun when the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i> ar­rived. It ma­neu­vered to cut into the herd of long-skulled preda­tors. At first the lat­ter showed lit­tle con­cern at the sight of this new mon­ster med­dling in the bat­tle. But they soon had to side­step its thrusts.</p>
				<p>What a strug­gle! Ned Land quickly grew en­thu­si­as­tic and even ended up ap­plaud­ing. Bran­dished in its cap­tain’s hands, the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i> was sim­ply a fear­some har­poon. He hurled it at those fleshy masses and ran them clean through, leav­ing be­hind two squirm­ing an­i­mal halves. As for those daunt­ing strokes of the tail hit­ting our sides, the ship never felt them. No more than the col­li­sions it caused. One sperm whale ex­ter­mi­nated, it ran at an­other, tacked on the spot so as not to miss its prey, went ahead or astern, obeyed its rud­der, dived when the cetacean sank to deeper strata, rose with it when it re­turned to the sur­face, struck it head-on or slant­wise, hacked at it or tore it, and from ev­ery di­rec­tion and at any speed, skew­ered it with its dread­ful spur.</p>
				<p>What blood­shed! What a hub­bub on the sur­face of the waves! What sharp hisses and snorts unique to these fright­ened an­i­mals! Their tails churned the nor­mally peace­ful strata into ac­tual bil­lows.</p>
				<p>This Homeric slaugh­ter dragged on for an hour, and the long-skulled preda­tors couldn’t get away. Sev­eral times ten or twelve of them teamed up, try­ing to crush the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i> with their sheer mass. Through the win­dows you could see their enor­mous mouths paved with teeth, their fear­some eyes. Los­ing all self-con­trol, Ned Land hurled threats and in­sults at them. You could feel them cling­ing to the sub­mersible like hounds atop a wild boar in the un­der­brush. But by forc­ing the pace of its pro­pel­ler, the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i> car­ried them off, dragged them un­der, or brought them back to the up­per level of the wa­ters, un­trou­bled by their enor­mous weight or their pow­er­ful grip.</p>
				<p>Fi­nally this mass of sperm whales thinned out. The waves grew tran­quil again. I felt us ris­ing to the sur­face of the ocean. The hatch opened and we rushed onto the plat­form.</p>
				<p>The sea was cov­ered with mu­ti­lated corpses. A fear­some ex­plo­sion couldn’t have slashed, torn, or shred­ded these fleshy masses with greater vi­o­lence. We were float­ing in the midst of gi­gan­tic bod­ies, bluish on the back, whitish on the belly, and all de­formed by enor­mous pro­tu­ber­ances. A few fright­ened sperm whales were flee­ing to­ward the hori­zon. The waves were dyed red over an area of sev­eral miles, and the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i> was float­ing in the mid­dle of a sea of blood.</p>
				<p>Cap­tain Nemo re­joined us.</p>
				<p>“Well, Mr. Land?” he said.</p>
				<p>“Well, sir,” replied the Cana­dian, whose en­thu­si­asm had sub­sided, “it’s a dread­ful sight for sure. But I’m a hunter not a butcher, and this is plain butch­ery.”</p>
				<p>“It was a slaugh­ter of de­struc­tive an­i­mals,” the cap­tain replied, “and the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i> is no butcher knife.”</p>
				<p>“I pre­fer my har­poon,” the Cana­dian an­swered.</p>
				<p>“To each his own,” the cap­tain replied, star­ing in­tently at Ned Land.</p>
				<p>I was in dread the lat­ter would give way to some vi­o­lent out­burst that might have had de­plorable con­se­quences. But his anger was di­verted by the sight of a baleen whale that the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i> had pulled along­side of just then.</p>
				<p>This an­i­mal had been un­able to es­cape the teeth of those sperm whales. I rec­og­nized the south­ern right whale, its head squat, its body dark all over. Anatom­i­cally, it’s dis­tin­guished from the white whale and the black right whale by the fu­sion of its seven cer­vi­cal ver­te­brae, and it num­bers two more ribs than its rel­a­tives. Float­ing on its side, its belly rid­dled with bites, the poor cetacean was dead. Still hang­ing from the tip of its mu­ti­lated fin was a lit­tle baby whale that it had been un­able to res­cue from the slaugh­ter. Its open mouth let wa­ter flow through its whale­bone like a mur­mur­ing surf.</p>
				<p>Cap­tain Nemo guided the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i> next to the an­i­mal’s corpse. Two of his men climbed onto the whale’s flank, and to my as­ton­ish­ment, I saw them draw from its ud­ders all the milk they held, in other words, enough to fill two or three casks.</p>
				<p>The cap­tain of­fered me a cup of this still-warm milk. I couldn’t help show­ing my dis­taste for such a bev­er­age. He as­sured me that this milk was ex­cel­lent, no dif­fer­ent from cow’s milk.</p>
				<p>I sam­pled it and agreed. So this milk was a worth­while re­serve ra­tion for us, be­cause in the form of salt but­ter or cheese, it would pro­vide a pleas­ant change of pace from our stan­dard fare.</p>
				<p>From that day on, I noted with some un­easi­ness that Ned Land’s at­ti­tudes to­ward Cap­tain Nemo grew worse and worse, and I de­cided to keep a close watch on the Cana­dian’s move­ments and ac­tiv­i­ties.</p>
			</section>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
