<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="en-US" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: http://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Chapter 22</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="part-2" epub:type="part">
			<section id="chapter-2-22" epub:type="chapter">
				<h3 epub:type="title">
					<span class="first-child" epub:type="z3998:roman">XXII</span>
					<span class="epub-type-subtitle" epub:type="subtitle">The Last Words of Captain Nemo</span>
				</h3>
				<p>The pan­els closed over this fright­ful view, but the lights didn’t go on in the lounge. In­side the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i> all was gloom and si­lence. It left this place of dev­as­ta­tion with prodi­gious speed, 100 feet be­neath the wa­ters. Where was it go­ing? North or south? Where would the man flee af­ter this hor­ri­ble act of re­venge?</p>
				<p>I reen­tered my state­room, where Ned and Con­seil were wait­ing silently. Cap­tain Nemo filled me with in­sur­mount­able hor­ror. What­ever he had once suf­fered at the hands of hu­man­ity, he had no right to mete out such pun­ish­ment. He had made me, if not an ac­com­plice, at least an eye­wit­ness to his vengeance! Even this was in­tol­er­a­ble.</p>
				<p>At eleven o’clock the elec­tric lights came back on. I went into the lounge. It was de­serted. I con­sulted the var­i­ous in­stru­ments. The <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i> was flee­ing north­ward at a speed of twenty-five miles per hour, some­times on the sur­face of the sea, some­times thirty feet be­neath it.</p>
				<p>After our po­si­tion had been marked on the chart, I saw that we were pass­ing into the mouth of the English Chan­nel, that our head­ing would take us to the north­ern­most seas with in­com­pa­ra­ble speed.</p>
				<p>I could barely glimpse the swift pass­ing of long­nose sharks, ham­mer­head sharks, spot­ted dog­fish that fre­quent these wa­ters, big ea­gle rays, swarms of sea­horse look­ing like knights on a chess­board, eels quiv­er­ing like fire­works ser­pents, armies of crab that fled obliquely by cross­ing their pin­cers over their cara­paces, fi­nally schools of por­poise that held con­tests of speed with the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i>. But by this point ob­serv­ing, study­ing, and clas­si­fy­ing were out of the ques­tion.</p>
				<p>By evening we had cleared 200 leagues up the At­lantic. Shad­ows gath­ered and gloom over­ran the sea un­til the moon came up.</p>
				<p>I re­paired to my state­room. I couldn’t sleep. I was as­saulted by night­mares. That hor­ri­ble scene of de­struc­tion kept re­peat­ing in my mind’s eye.</p>
				<p>From that day for­ward, who knows where the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i> took us in the north At­lantic basin? Al­ways at in­cal­cu­la­ble speed! Al­ways amid the High Arc­tic mists! Did it call at the capes of Spitzber­gen or the shores of No­vaya Zemlya? Did it visit such un­charted seas as the White Sea, the Kara Sea, the Gulf of Ob, the Lyakhov Is­lands, or those un­known beaches on the Siberian coast? I’m un­able to say. I lost track of the pass­ing hours. Time was in abeyance on the ship’s clocks. As hap­pens in the po­lar re­gions, it seemed that night and day no longer fol­lowed their nor­mal se­quence. I felt my­self be­ing drawn into that strange do­main where the over­wrought imag­i­na­tion of Edgar Al­lan Poe was at home. Like his fa­bled Arthur Gor­don Pym, I ex­pected any mo­ment to see that “shrouded hu­man fig­ure, very far larger in its pro­por­tions than any dweller among men,” thrown across the cataract that pro­tects the out­skirts of the pole!</p>
				<p>I es­ti­mate—but per­haps I’m mis­taken—that the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i>’s hap­haz­ard course con­tin­ued for fif­teen or twenty days, and I’m not sure how long this would have gone on with­out the catas­tro­phe that ended our voy­age. As for Cap­tain Nemo, he was no longer in the pic­ture. As for his chief of­fi­cer, the same ap­plied. Not one crew­man was vis­i­ble for a sin­gle in­stant. The <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i> cruised be­neath the wa­ters al­most con­tin­u­ously. When it rose briefly to the sur­face to re­new our air, the hatches opened and closed as if au­to­mated. No more po­si­tions were re­ported on the world map. I didn’t know where we were.</p>
				<p>I’ll also men­tion that the Cana­dian, at the end of his strength and pa­tience, made no fur­ther ap­pear­ances. Con­seil couldn’t coax a sin­gle word out of him and feared that, in a fit of delir­ium while un­der the sway of a ghastly home­sick­ness, Ned would kill him­self. So he kept a de­voted watch on his friend ev­ery in­stant.</p>
				<p>You can ap­pre­ci­ate that un­der these con­di­tions, our sit­u­a­tion had be­come un­ten­able.</p>
				<p>One morn­ing—whose date I’m un­able to spec­ify—I was slum­ber­ing near the first hours of day­light, a painful, sickly slum­ber. Wak­ing up, I saw Ned Land lean­ing over me, and I heard him tell me in a low voice:</p>
				<p>“We’re go­ing to es­cape!”</p>
				<p>I sat up.</p>
				<p>“When?” I asked.</p>
				<p>“Tonight. There doesn’t seem to be any su­per­vi­sion left on the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i>. You’d think a to­tal daze was reign­ing on board. Will you be ready, sir?”</p>
				<p>“Yes. Where are we?”</p>
				<p>“In sight of land. I saw it through the mists just this morn­ing, twenty miles to the east.”</p>
				<p>“What land is it?”</p>
				<p>“I’ve no idea, but what­ever it is, there we’ll take refuge.”</p>
				<p>“Yes, Ned! We’ll es­cape tonight even if the sea swal­lows us up!”</p>
				<p>“The sea’s rough, the wind’s blow­ing hard, but a twenty-mile run in the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i>’s nim­ble long­boat doesn’t scare me. Un­known to the crew, I’ve stowed some food and flasks of wa­ter in­side.”</p>
				<p>“I’m with you.”</p>
				<p>“What’s more,” the Cana­dian added, “if they catch me, I’ll de­fend my­self, I’ll fight to the death.”</p>
				<p>“Then we’ll die to­gether, Ned my friend.”</p>
				<p>My mind was made up. The Cana­dian left me. I went out on the plat­form, where I could barely stand up­right against the jolts of the bil­lows. The skies were threat­en­ing, but land lay in­side those dense mists, and we had to es­cape. Not a sin­gle day, or even a sin­gle hour, could we af­ford to lose.</p>
				<p>I re­turned to the lounge, dread­ing yet de­sir­ing an en­counter with Cap­tain Nemo, want­ing yet not want­ing to see him. What would I say to him? How could I hide the in­vol­un­tary hor­ror he in­spired in me? No! It was best not to meet him face to face! Best to try and for­get him! And yet … !</p>
				<p>How long that day seemed, the last I would spend aboard the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i>! I was left to my­self. Ned Land and Con­seil avoided speak­ing to me, afraid they would give them­selves away.</p>
				<p>At six o’clock I ate sup­per, but I had no ap­petite. De­spite my re­vul­sion, I forced it down, want­ing to keep my strength up.</p>
				<p>At 6:30 Ned Land en­tered my state­room. He told me:</p>
				<p>“We won’t see each other again be­fore we go. At ten o’clock the moon won’t be up yet. We’ll take ad­van­tage of the dark­ness. Come to the skiff. Con­seil and I will be in­side wait­ing for you.”</p>
				<p>The Cana­dian left with­out giv­ing me time to an­swer him.</p>
				<p>I wanted to ver­ify the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i>’s head­ing. I made my way to the lounge. We were rac­ing north-north­east with fright­ful speed, fifty me­ters down.</p>
				<p>I took one last look at the nat­u­ral won­ders and artis­tic trea­sures amassed in the mu­seum, this un­ri­valed col­lec­tion doomed to per­ish some­day in the depths of the seas, to­gether with its cu­ra­tor. I wanted to es­tab­lish one supreme im­pres­sion in my mind. I stayed there an hour, bask­ing in the aura of the ceil­ing lights, pass­ing in re­view the trea­sures shin­ing in their glass cases. Then I re­turned to my state­room.</p>
				<p>There I dressed in sturdy sea­far­ing clothes. I gath­ered my notes and packed them ten­derly about my per­son. My heart was pound­ing might­ily. I couldn’t curb its pul­sa­tions. My anx­i­ety and ag­i­ta­tion would cer­tainly have given me away if Cap­tain Nemo had seen me.</p>
				<p>What was he do­ing just then? I lis­tened at the door to his state­room. I heard the sound of foot­steps. Cap­tain Nemo was in­side. He hadn’t gone to bed. With his ev­ery move­ment I imag­ined he would ap­pear and ask me why I wanted to es­cape! I felt in a per­pet­ual state of alarm. My imag­i­na­tion mag­ni­fied this sen­sa­tion. The feel­ing be­came so acute, I won­dered whether it wouldn’t be bet­ter to en­ter the cap­tain’s state­room, dare him face to face, brave it out with word and deed!</p>
				<p>It was an in­sane idea. For­tu­nately I con­trolled my­self and stretched out on the bed to soothe my bod­ily ag­i­ta­tion. My nerves calmed a lit­tle, but with my brain so aroused, I did a swift re­view of my whole ex­is­tence aboard the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i>, ev­ery pleas­ant or un­pleas­ant in­ci­dent that had crossed my path since I went over­board from the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Abra­ham Lin­coln</i>: the un­der­wa­ter hunt­ing trip, the Tor­res Strait, our run­ning aground, the sav­ages of Pa­pua, the coral ceme­tery, the Suez pas­sage­way, the is­land of San­torini, the Cre­tan diver, the Bay of Vigo, At­lantis, the Ice Bank, the South Pole, our im­pris­on­ment in the ice, the bat­tle with the dev­il­fish, the storm in the Gulf Stream, the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Avenger</i>, and that hor­ri­ble scene of the ves­sel sink­ing with its crew … ! All these events passed be­fore my eyes like back­drops un­rolling up­stage in a the­ater. In this strange set­ting Cap­tain Nemo then grew fan­tas­ti­cally. His fea­tures were ac­cen­tu­ated, tak­ing on su­per­hu­man pro­por­tions. He was no longer my equal, he was the Man of the Waters, the Spirit of the Seas.</p>
				<p>By then it was 9:30. I held my head in both hands to keep it from burst­ing. I closed my eyes. I no longer wanted to think. A half hour still to wait! A half hour of night­mares that could drive me in­sane!</p>
				<p>Just then I heard in­dis­tinct chords from the or­gan, melan­choly har­monies from some un­de­fin­able hymn, ac­tual plead­ings from a soul try­ing to sever its earthly ties. I lis­tened with all my senses at once, barely breath­ing, im­mersed like Cap­tain Nemo in this mu­si­cal trance that was draw­ing him be­yond the bounds of this world.</p>
				<p>Then a sud­den thought ter­ri­fied me. Cap­tain Nemo had left his state­room. He was in the same lounge I had to cross in or­der to es­cape. There I would en­counter him one last time. He would see me, per­haps speak to me! One ges­ture from him could oblit­er­ate me, a sin­gle word shackle me to his ves­sel!</p>
				<p>Even so, ten o’clock was about to strike. It was time to leave my state­room and re­join my com­pan­ions.</p>
				<p>I dared not hes­i­tate, even if Cap­tain Nemo stood be­fore me. I opened the door cau­tiously, but as it swung on its hinges, it seemed to make a fright­ful noise. This noise ex­isted, per­haps, only in my imag­i­na­tion!</p>
				<p>I crept for­ward through the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i>’s dark gang­ways, paus­ing af­ter each step to curb the pound­ing of my heart.</p>
				<p>I ar­rived at the cor­ner door of the lounge. I opened it gen­tly. The lounge was plunged in pro­found dark­ness. Chords from the or­gan were re­ver­ber­at­ing faintly. Cap­tain Nemo was there. He didn’t see me. Even in broad day­light I doubt that he would have no­ticed me, so com­pletely was he im­mersed in his trance.</p>
				<p>I inched over the car­pet, avoid­ing the tini­est bump whose noise might give me away. It took me five min­utes to reach the door at the far end, which led into the li­brary.</p>
				<p>I was about to open it when a gasp from Cap­tain Nemo nailed me to the spot. I re­al­ized that he was stand­ing up. I even got a glimpse of him be­cause some rays of light from the li­brary had fil­tered into the lounge. He was com­ing to­ward me, arms crossed, silent, not walk­ing but glid­ing like a ghost. His chest was heav­ing, swelling with sobs. And I heard him mur­mur these words, the last of his to reach my ears:</p>
				<p>“O almighty God! Enough! Enough!”</p>
				<p>Was it a vow of re­pen­tance that had just es­caped from this man’s con­science … ?</p>
				<p>Fran­tic, I rushed into the li­brary. I climbed the cen­tral com­pan­ion­way, and go­ing along the up­per gang­way, I ar­rived at the skiff. I went through the open­ing that had al­ready given ac­cess to my two com­pan­ions.</p>
				<p>“Let’s go, let’s go!” I ex­claimed.</p>
				<p>“Right away!” the Cana­dian replied.</p>
				<p>First, Ned Land closed and bolted the open­ing cut into the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i>’s sheet iron, us­ing the mon­key wrench he had with him. After like­wise clos­ing the open­ing in the skiff, the Cana­dian be­gan to un­screw the nuts still bolt­ing us to the un­der­wa­ter boat.</p>
				<p>Sud­denly a noise from the ship’s in­te­rior be­came au­di­ble. Voices were an­swer­ing each other hur­riedly. What was it? Had they spot­ted our es­cape? I felt Ned Land slid­ing a dag­ger into my hand.</p>
				<p>“Yes,” I mut­tered, “we know how to die!”</p>
				<p>The Cana­dian paused in his work. But one word twenty times re­peated, one dread­ful word, told me the rea­son for the ag­i­ta­tion spread­ing aboard the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i>. We weren’t the cause of the crew’s con­cern.</p>
				<p>“Mael­strom! Mael­strom!” they were shout­ing.</p>
				<p>The Mael­strom! Could a more fright­en­ing name have rung in our ears un­der more fright­en­ing cir­cum­stances? Were we ly­ing in the dan­ger­ous wa­ter­ways off the Nor­we­gian coast? Was the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i> be­ing dragged into this whirlpool just as the skiff was about to de­tach from its plat­ing?</p>
				<p>As you know, at the turn of the tide, the wa­ters con­fined be­tween the Faroe and Lo­foten Is­lands rush out with ir­re­sistible vi­o­lence. They form a vor­tex from which no ship has ever been able to es­cape. Mon­strous waves race to­gether from ev­ery point of the hori­zon. They form a whirlpool aptly called “the ocean’s navel,” whose at­tract­ing power ex­tends a dis­tance of fif­teen kilo­me­ters. It can suck down not only ships but whales, and even po­lar bears from the north­ern­most re­gions.</p>
				<p>This was where the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i> had been sent ac­ci­den­tally—or per­haps de­lib­er­ately—by its cap­tain. It was sweep­ing around in a spi­ral whose ra­dius kept grow­ing smaller and smaller. The skiff, still at­tached to the ship’s plat­ing, was like­wise car­ried around at dizzy­ing speed. I could feel us whirling. I was ex­pe­ri­enc­ing that ac­com­pa­ny­ing nau­sea that fol­lows such con­tin­u­ous spin­ning mo­tions. We were in dread, in the last stages of sheer hor­ror, our blood frozen in our veins, our nerves numb, drenched in cold sweat as if from the throes of dy­ing! And what a noise around our frail skiff! What roars echo­ing from sev­eral miles away! What crashes from the wa­ters break­ing against sharp rocks on the seafloor, where the hard­est ob­jects are smashed, where tree trunks are worn down and worked into “a shaggy fur,” as Nor­we­gians ex­press it!</p>
				<p>What a predica­ment! We were rock­ing fright­fully. The <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i> de­fended it­self like a hu­man be­ing. Its steel mus­cles were crack­ing. Some­times it stood on end, the three of us along with it!</p>
				<p>“We’ve got to hold on tight,” Ned said, “and screw the nuts down again! If we can stay at­tached to the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i>, we can still make it … !”</p>
				<p>He hadn’t fin­ished speak­ing when a crack­ing sound oc­curred. The nuts gave way, and ripped out of its socket, the skiff was hurled like a stone from a sling into the midst of the vor­tex.</p>
				<p>My head struck against an iron tim­ber, and with this vi­o­lent shock I lost con­scious­ness.</p>
			</section>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
