<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="en-US" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: http://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Chapter 9</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="part-2" epub:type="part">
			<section id="chapter-2-9" epub:type="chapter">
				<h3 epub:type="title">
					<span class="first-child" epub:type="z3998:roman">IX</span>
					<span class="epub-type-subtitle" epub:type="subtitle">A Lost Continent</span>
				</h3>
				<p>The next morn­ing, Fe­bru­ary 19, I be­held the Cana­dian en­ter­ing my state­room. I was ex­pect­ing this visit. He wore an ex­pres­sion of great dis­ap­point­ment.</p>
				<p>“Well, sir?” he said to me.</p>
				<p>“Well, Ned, the fates were against us yes­ter­day.”</p>
				<p>“Yes! That damned cap­tain had to call a halt just as we were go­ing to es­cape from his boat.”</p>
				<p>“Yes, Ned, he had busi­ness with his bankers.”</p>
				<p>“His bankers?”</p>
				<p>“Or rather his bank vaults. By which I mean this ocean, where his wealth is safer than in any na­tional trea­sury.”</p>
				<p>I then re­lated the evening’s in­ci­dents to the Cana­dian, se­cretly hop­ing he would come around to the idea of not de­sert­ing the cap­tain; but my nar­ra­tive had no re­sult other than Ned’s voic­ing deep re­gret that he hadn’t strolled across the Vigo bat­tle­field on his own be­half.</p>
				<p>“Any­how,” he said, “it’s not over yet! My first har­poon missed, that’s all! We’ll suc­ceed the next time, and as soon as this evening, if need be …”</p>
				<p>“What’s the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i>’s head­ing?” I asked.</p>
				<p>“I’ve no idea,” Ned replied.</p>
				<p>“All right, at noon we’ll find out what our po­si­tion is!”</p>
				<p>The Cana­dian re­turned to Con­seil’s side. As soon as I was dressed, I went into the lounge. The com­pass wasn’t en­cour­ag­ing. The <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i>’s course was south-south­west. We were turn­ing our backs on Europe.</p>
				<p>I could hardly wait un­til our po­si­tion was re­ported on the chart. Near 11:30 the bal­last tanks emp­tied, and the sub­mersible rose to the sur­face of the ocean. I leaped onto the plat­form. Ned Land was al­ready there.</p>
				<p>No more shore in sight. Noth­ing but the im­mense­ness of the sea. A few sails were on the hori­zon, no doubt ships go­ing as far as Cape São Roque to find fa­vor­able winds for dou­bling the Cape of Good Hope. The sky was over­cast. A squall was on the way.</p>
				<p>Fu­ri­ous, Ned tried to see through the mists on the hori­zon. He still hoped that be­hind all that fog there lay those shores he longed for.</p>
				<p>At noon the sun made a mo­men­tary ap­pear­ance. Tak­ing ad­van­tage of this rift in the clouds, the chief of­fi­cer took the orb’s al­ti­tude. Then the sea grew tur­bu­lent, we went be­low again, and the hatch closed once more.</p>
				<p>When I con­sulted the chart an hour later, I saw that the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i>’s po­si­tion was marked at lon­gi­tude 16° 17′ and lat­i­tude 33° 22′, a good 150 leagues from the near­est coast. It wouldn’t do to even dream of es­cap­ing, and I’ll let the reader de­cide how promptly the Cana­dian threw a tantrum when I ven­tured to tell him our sit­u­a­tion.</p>
				<p>As for me, I wasn’t ex­actly grief-stricken. I felt as if a heavy weight had been lifted from me, and I was able to re­sume my reg­u­lar tasks in a state of com­par­a­tive calm.</p>
				<p>Near eleven o’clock in the evening, I re­ceived a most un­ex­pected visit from Cap­tain Nemo. He asked me very gra­ciously if I felt ex­hausted from our vigil the night be­fore. I said no.</p>
				<p>“Then, Pro­fes­sor Aron­nax, I pro­pose an un­usual ex­cur­sion.”</p>
				<p>“Pro­pose away, cap­tain.”</p>
				<p>“So far you’ve vis­ited the ocean depths only by day and un­der sun­light. Would you like to see these depths on a dark night?”</p>
				<p>“Very much.”</p>
				<p>“I warn you, this will be an ex­haust­ing stroll. We’ll need to walk long hours and scale a moun­tain. The roads aren’t ter­ri­bly well kept up.”</p>
				<p>“Every­thing you say, cap­tain, just in­creases my cu­rios­ity. I’m ready to go with you.”</p>
				<p>“Then come along, pro­fes­sor, and we’ll go put on our div­ing suits.”</p>
				<p>Ar­riv­ing at the wardrobe, I saw that nei­ther my com­pan­ions nor any crew­men would be com­ing with us on this ex­cur­sion. Cap­tain Nemo hadn’t even sug­gested my fetch­ing Ned or Con­seil.</p>
				<p>In a few mo­ments we had put on our equip­ment. Air tanks, abun­dantly charged, were placed on our backs, but the elec­tric lamps were not in readi­ness. I com­mented on this to the cap­tain.</p>
				<p>“They’ll be use­less to us,” he replied.</p>
				<p>I thought I hadn’t heard him right, but I couldn’t re­peat my com­ment be­cause the cap­tain’s head had al­ready dis­ap­peared into its metal cov­er­ing. I fin­ished har­ness­ing my­self, I felt an alpen­stock be­ing placed in my hand, and a few min­utes later, af­ter the usual pro­ce­dures, we set foot on the floor of the At­lantic, 300 me­ters down.</p>
				<p>Mid­night was ap­proach­ing. The wa­ters were pro­foundly dark, but Cap­tain Nemo pointed to a red­dish spot in the dis­tance, a sort of wide glow shim­mer­ing about two miles from the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i>. What this fire was, what sub­stances fed it, how and why it kept burn­ing in the liq­uid mass, I couldn’t say. Any­how it lit our way, al­though hazily, but I soon grew ac­cus­tomed to this unique gloom, and in these cir­cum­stances I un­der­stood the use­less­ness of the Ruhmko­rff de­vice.</p>
				<p>Side by side, Cap­tain Nemo and I walked di­rectly to­ward this con­spic­u­ous flame. The level seafloor rose im­per­cep­ti­bly. We took long strides, helped by our alpen­stocks; but in gen­eral our progress was slow, be­cause our feet kept sink­ing into a kind of slimy mud mixed with sea­weed and as­sorted flat stones.</p>
				<p>As we moved for­ward, I heard a kind of pit­ter-pat­ter above my head. Some­times this noise in­creased and be­came a con­tin­u­ous crackle. I soon re­al­ized the cause. It was a heavy rain­fall rat­tling on the sur­face of the waves. In­stinc­tively I wor­ried that I might get soaked! By wa­ter in the midst of wa­ter! I couldn’t help smil­ing at this out­landish no­tion. But to tell the truth, wear­ing these heavy div­ing suits, you no longer feel the liq­uid el­e­ment, you sim­ply think you’re in the midst of air a lit­tle denser than air on land, that’s all.</p>
				<p>After half an hour of walk­ing, the seafloor grew rocky. Jel­ly­fish, mi­cro­scopic crus­taceans, and sea-pen coral lit it faintly with their phos­pho­res­cent glim­mers. I glimpsed piles of stones cov­ered by a cou­ple mil­lion zoophytes and tan­gles of al­gae. My feet of­ten slipped on this vis­cous sea­weed car­pet, and with­out my alpen­stock I would have fallen more than once. When I turned around, I could still see the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i>’s whitish bea­con, which was start­ing to grow pale in the dis­tance.</p>
				<p>Those piles of stones just men­tioned were laid out on the ocean floor with a dis­tinct but in­ex­pli­ca­ble sym­me­try. I spot­ted gi­gan­tic fur­rows trail­ing off into the dis­tant dark­ness, their length in­cal­cu­la­ble. There also were other pe­cu­liar­i­ties I couldn’t make sense of. It seemed to me that my heavy lead soles were crush­ing a lit­ter of bones that made a dry crack­ling noise. So what were these vast plains we were now cross­ing? I wanted to ask the cap­tain, but I still didn’t grasp that sign lan­guage that al­lowed him to chat with his com­pan­ions when they went with him on his un­der­wa­ter ex­cur­sions.</p>
				<p>Mean­while the red­dish light guid­ing us had ex­panded and in­flamed the hori­zon. The pres­ence of this fur­nace un­der the wa­ters had me ex­tremely puz­zled. Was it some sort of elec­tri­cal dis­charge? Was I ap­proach­ing some nat­u­ral phe­nom­e­non still un­known to sci­en­tists on shore? Or, rather (and this thought did cross my mind), had the hand of man in­ter­vened in that blaze? Had hu­man be­ings fanned those flames? In these deep strata would I meet up with more of Cap­tain Nemo’s com­pan­ions, friends he was about to visit who led lives as strange as his own? Would I find a whole colony of ex­iles down here, men tired of the world’s woes, men who had sought and found in­de­pen­dence in the ocean’s lower depths? All these in­sane, in­ad­mis­si­ble ideas dogged me, and in this frame of mind, con­tin­u­ally ex­cited by the se­ries of won­ders pass­ing be­fore my eyes, I wouldn’t have been sur­prised to find on this sea bot­tom one of those un­der­wa­ter towns Cap­tain Nemo dreamed about!</p>
				<p>Our path was get­ting brighter and brighter. The red glow had turned white and was ra­di­at­ing from a moun­tain peak about 800 feet high. But what I saw was sim­ply a re­flec­tion pro­duced by the crys­tal wa­ters of these strata. The fur­nace that was the source of this in­ex­pli­ca­ble light oc­cu­pied the far side of the moun­tain.</p>
				<p>In the midst of the stone mazes fur­row­ing this At­lantic seafloor, Cap­tain Nemo moved for­ward with­out hes­i­ta­tion. He knew this dark path. No doubt he had of­ten trav­eled it and was in­ca­pable of los­ing his way. I fol­lowed him with un­shake­able con­fi­dence. He seemed like some Spirit of the Sea, and as he walked ahead of me, I mar­veled at his tall fig­ure, which stood out in black against the glow­ing back­ground of the hori­zon.</p>
				<p>It was one o’clock in the morn­ing. We ar­rived at the moun­tain’s lower gra­di­ents. But in grap­pling with them, we had to ven­ture up dif­fi­cult trails through a huge thicket.</p>
				<p>Yes, a thicket of dead trees! Trees with­out leaves, with­out sap, turned to stone by the ac­tion of the wa­ters, and crowned here and there by gi­gan­tic pines. It was like a still-erect coal­field, its roots clutch­ing bro­ken soil, its boughs clearly out­lined against the ceil­ing of the wa­ters like thin, black, pa­per cutouts. Pic­ture a for­est cling­ing to the sides of a peak in the Harz Moun­tains, but a sub­merged for­est. The trails were clut­tered with al­gae and fu­cus plants, hosts of crus­taceans swarm­ing among them. I plunged on, scal­ing rocks, strad­dling fallen tree trunks, snap­ping ma­rine creep­ers that swayed from one tree to an­other, star­tling the fish that flit­ted from branch to branch. Car­ried away, I didn’t feel ex­hausted any more. I fol­lowed a guide who was im­mune to ex­haus­tion.</p>
				<p>What a sight! How can I de­scribe it! How can I por­tray these woods and rocks in this liq­uid set­ting, their lower parts dark and sullen, their up­per parts tinted red in this light whose in­ten­sity was dou­bled by the re­flect­ing power of the wa­ters! We scaled rocks that crum­bled be­hind us, col­laps­ing in enor­mous sec­tions with the hol­low rum­ble of an avalanche. To our right and left there were carved gloomy gal­leries where the eye lost its way. Huge glades opened up, seem­ingly cleared by the hand of man, and I some­times won­dered whether some res­i­dents of these un­der­wa­ter re­gions would sud­denly ap­pear be­fore me.</p>
				<p>But Cap­tain Nemo kept climb­ing. I didn’t want to fall be­hind. I fol­lowed him boldly. My alpen­stock was a great help. One wrong step would have been dis­as­trous on the nar­row paths cut into the sides of these chasms, but I walked along with a firm tread and with­out the slight­est feel­ing of dizzi­ness. Some­times I leaped over a crevasse whose depth would have made me re­coil had I been in the midst of glaciers on shore; some­times I ven­tured out on a wob­bling tree trunk fallen across a gorge, with­out look­ing down, hav­ing eyes only for mar­veling at the wild scenery of this re­gion. There, lean­ing on er­rat­i­cally cut foun­da­tions, mon­u­men­tal rocks seemed to defy the laws of bal­ance. From be­tween their stony knees, trees sprang up like jets un­der fear­some pres­sure, sup­port­ing other trees that sup­ported them in turn. Next, nat­u­ral tow­ers with wide, steeply carved bat­tle­ments leaned at an­gles that, on dry land, the laws of grav­ity would never have au­tho­rized.</p>
				<p>And I too could feel the dif­fer­ence cre­ated by the wa­ter’s pow­er­ful den­sity—de­spite my heavy cloth­ing, cop­per head­piece, and metal soles, I climbed the most im­pos­si­bly steep gra­di­ents with all the nim­ble­ness, I swear it, of a chamois or a Pyre­nees moun­tain goat!</p>
				<p>As for my ac­count of this ex­cur­sion un­der the wa­ters, I’m well aware that it sounds in­cred­i­ble! I’m the chron­i­cler of deeds seem­ingly im­pos­si­ble and yet in­con­testably real. This was no fan­tasy. This was what I saw and felt!</p>
				<p>Two hours af­ter leav­ing the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i>, we had cleared the tim­ber­line, and 100 feet above our heads stood the moun­tain peak, form­ing a dark sil­hou­ette against the bril­liant glare that came from its far slope. Pet­ri­fied shrubs ram­bled here and there in sprawl­ing zigzags. Fish rose in a body at our feet like birds star­tled in tall grass. The rocky mass was gouged with im­pen­e­tra­ble crevices, deep caves, un­fath­omable holes at whose far ends I could hear fear­some things mov­ing around. My blood would cur­dle as I watched some enor­mous an­tenna bar my path, or saw some fright­ful pin­cer snap shut in the shadow of some cav­ity! A thou­sand specks of light glit­tered in the midst of the gloom. They were the eyes of gi­gan­tic crus­taceans crouch­ing in their lairs, gi­ant lob­sters rear­ing up like spear car­ri­ers and mov­ing their claws with a scrap-iron clank­ing, ti­tanic crabs aim­ing their bod­ies like can­nons on their car­riages, and hideous dev­il­fish in­ter­twin­ing their ten­ta­cles like bushes of writhing snakes.</p>
				<p>What was this as­tound­ing world that I didn’t yet know? In what or­der did these ar­tic­u­lates be­long, these crea­tures for which the rocks pro­vided a sec­ond cara­pace? Where had na­ture learned the se­cret of their veg­e­tat­ing ex­is­tence, and for how many cen­turies had they lived in the ocean’s lower strata?</p>
				<p>But I couldn’t linger. Cap­tain Nemo, on fa­mil­iar terms with these dread­ful an­i­mals, no longer minded them. We ar­rived at a pre­lim­i­nary plateau where still other sur­prises were wait­ing for me. There pic­turesque ru­ins took shape, be­tray­ing the hand of man, not our Creator. They were huge stacks of stones in which you could dis­tin­guish the in­dis­tinct forms of palaces and tem­ples, now ar­rayed in hosts of blos­som­ing zoophytes, and over it all, not ivy but a heavy man­tle of al­gae and fu­cus plants.</p>
				<p>But what part of the globe could this be, this land swal­lowed by cat­a­clysms? Who had set up these rocks and stones like the dol­mens of pre­his­toric times? Where was I, where had Cap­tain Nemo’s fan­cies taken me?</p>
				<p>I wanted to ask him. Un­able to, I stopped him. I seized his arm. But he shook his head, pointed to the moun­tain’s top­most peak, and seemed to tell me:</p>
				<p>“Come on! Come with me! Come higher!”</p>
				<p>I fol­lowed him with one last burst of en­ergy, and in a few min­utes I had scaled the peak, which crowned the whole rocky mass by some ten me­ters.</p>
				<p>I looked back down the side we had just cleared. There the moun­tain rose only 700 to 800 feet above the plains; but on its far slope it crowned the re­ced­ing bot­tom of this part of the At­lantic by a height twice that. My eyes scanned the dis­tance and took in a vast area lit by in­tense flashes of light. In essence, this moun­tain was a vol­cano. Fifty feet be­low its peak, amid a shower of stones and slag, a wide crater vom­ited tor­rents of lava that were dis­persed in fiery cas­cades into the heart of the liq­uid mass. So sit­u­ated, this vol­cano was an im­mense torch that lit up the lower plains all the way to the hori­zon.</p>
				<p>As I said, this un­der­wa­ter crater spewed lava, but not flames. Flames need oxy­gen from the air and are un­able to spread un­der­wa­ter; but a lava flow, which con­tains in it­self the prin­ci­ple of its in­can­des­cence, can rise to a white heat, over­power the liq­uid el­e­ment, and turn it into steam on con­tact. Swift cur­rents swept away all this dif­fuse gas, and tor­rents of lava slid to the foot of the moun­tain, like the dis­gorg­ings of a Mt. Ve­su­vius over the city lim­its of a sec­ond Torre del Greco.</p>
				<p>In fact, there be­neath my eyes was a town in ru­ins, de­mol­ished, over­whelmed, laid low, its roofs caved in, its tem­ples pulled down, its arches dis­lo­cated, its col­umns stretch­ing over the earth; in these ru­ins you could still de­tect the solid pro­por­tions of a sort of Tus­can ar­chi­tec­ture; far­ther off, the re­mains of a gi­gan­tic aque­duct; here, the caked heights of an acrop­o­lis along with the fluid forms of a Parthenon; there, the rem­nants of a wharf, as if some by­gone port had long ago har­bored mer­chant ves­sels and triple-tiered war gal­leys on the shores of some lost ocean; still far­ther off, long rows of col­laps­ing walls, de­serted thor­ough­fares, a whole Pom­peii buried un­der the wa­ters, which Cap­tain Nemo had res­ur­rected be­fore my eyes!</p>
				<p>Where was I? Where was I? I had to find out at all cost, I wanted to speak, I wanted to rip off the cop­per sphere im­pris­on­ing my head.</p>
				<p>But Cap­tain Nemo came over and stopped me with a ges­ture. Then, pick­ing up a piece of chalky stone, he ad­vanced to a black basaltic rock and scrawled this one word:</p>
				<blockquote class="inscription">
					<p class="first-child">At­lantis</p>
				</blockquote>
				<p>What light­ning flashed through my mind! At­lantis, that an­cient land of Meropis men­tioned by the his­to­rian Theopom­pus; Plato’s At­lantis; the con­ti­nent whose very ex­is­tence has been de­nied by such philoso­phers and sci­en­tists as Ori­gen, Por­phyry, Iam­blichus, d’Anville, Malte-Brun, and Hum­boldt, who en­tered its dis­ap­pear­ance in the ledger of myths and folk tales; the coun­try whose re­al­ity has nev­er­the­less been ac­cepted by such other thinkers as Posi­do­nius, Pliny, Am­mi­anus Mar­celli­nus, Ter­tul­lian, En­gel, Scherer, Tourne­fort, Buf­fon, and d’Avezac; I had this land right un­der my eyes, fur­nish­ing its own unim­peach­able ev­i­dence of the catas­tro­phe that had over­taken it! So this was the sub­merged re­gion that had ex­isted out­side Europe, Asia, and Libya, be­yond the Pil­lars of Her­cules, home of those pow­er­ful At­lantean peo­ple against whom an­cient Greece had waged its ear­li­est wars!</p>
				<p>The writer whose nar­ra­tives record the lofty deeds of those heroic times is Plato him­self. His di­a­logues <i epub:type="se:name.publication">Ti­maeus</i> and <i epub:type="se:name.publication">Cri­tias</i> were drafted with the poet and leg­is­la­tor Solon as their in­spi­ra­tion, as it were.</p>
				<p>One day Solon was con­vers­ing with some el­derly wise men in the Egyp­tian cap­i­tal of Sais, a town al­ready 8,000 years of age, as doc­u­mented by the an­nals en­graved on the sa­cred walls of its tem­ples. One of these el­ders re­lated the his­tory of an­other town 1,000 years older still. This orig­i­nal city of Athens, ninety cen­turies old, had been in­vaded and partly de­stroyed by the At­lanteans. Th­ese At­lanteans, he said, resided on an im­mense con­ti­nent greater than Africa and Asia com­bined, tak­ing in an area that lay be­tween lat­i­tude 12° and 40° north. Their do­min­ion ex­tended even to Egypt. They tried to en­force their rule as far as Greece, but they had to re­treat be­fore the in­domitable re­sis­tance of the Hel­lenic peo­ple. Cen­turies passed. A cat­a­clysm oc­curred—floods, earth­quakes. A sin­gle night and day were enough to oblit­er­ate this At­lantis, whose high­est peaks (Madeira, the Azores, the Ca­naries, the Cape Verde Is­lands) still emerge above the waves.</p>
				<p>Th­ese were the his­tor­i­cal mem­o­ries that Cap­tain Nemo’s scrawl sent rush­ing through my mind. Thus, led by the strangest of fates, I was tread­ing un­der­foot one of the moun­tains of that con­ti­nent! My hands were touch­ing ru­ins many thou­sands of years old, con­tem­po­rary with pre­his­toric times! I was walk­ing in the very place where con­tem­po­raries of early man had walked! My heavy soles were crush­ing the skele­tons of an­i­mals from the age of fa­ble, an­i­mals that used to take cover in the shade of these trees now turned to stone!</p>
				<p>Oh, why was I so short of time! I would have gone down the steep slopes of this moun­tain, crossed this en­tire im­mense con­ti­nent, which surely con­nects Africa with Amer­ica, and vis­ited its great pre­his­toric cities. Un­der my eyes there per­haps lay the war­like town of Makhi­mos or the pi­ous vil­lage of Eusebes, whose gi­gan­tic in­hab­i­tants lived for whole cen­turies and had the strength to raise blocks of stone that still with­stood the ac­tion of the wa­ters. One day per­haps, some vol­canic phe­nom­e­non will bring these sunken ru­ins back to the sur­face of the waves! Numer­ous un­der­wa­ter vol­ca­noes have been sighted in this part of the ocean, and many ships have felt ter­rific tremors when pass­ing over these tur­bu­lent depths. A few have heard hol­low noises that an­nounced some strug­gle of the el­e­ments far be­low, oth­ers have hauled in vol­canic ash hurled above the waves. As far as the equa­tor this whole seafloor is still un­der con­struc­tion by plu­tonic forces. And in some re­mote epoch, built up by vol­canic dis­gorg­ings and suc­ces­sive lay­ers of lava, who knows whether the peaks of these fire-belch­ing moun­tains may reap­pear above the sur­face of the At­lantic!</p>
				<p>As I mused in this way, try­ing to es­tab­lish in my mem­ory ev­ery de­tail of this im­pres­sive land­scape, Cap­tain Nemo was lean­ing his el­bows on a moss-cov­ered mon­u­ment, mo­tion­less as if pet­ri­fied in some mute trance. Was he dream­ing of those lost gen­er­a­tions, ask­ing them for the se­cret of hu­man des­tiny? Was it here that this strange man came to re­vive him­self, bask­ing in his­tor­i­cal mem­o­ries, re­liv­ing that by­gone life, he who had no de­sire for our mod­ern one? I would have given any­thing to know his thoughts, to share them, un­der­stand them!</p>
				<p>We stayed in this place an en­tire hour, con­tem­plat­ing its vast plains in the lava’s glow, which some­times took on a star­tling in­ten­sity. In­ner boil­ings sent quick shiv­ers run­ning through the moun­tain’s crust. Noises from deep un­der­neath, clearly trans­mit­ted by the liq­uid medium, re­ver­ber­ated with ma­jes­tic am­pli­tude.</p>
				<p>Just then the moon ap­peared for an in­stant through the wa­tery mass, cast­ing a few pale rays over this sub­merged con­ti­nent. It was only a fleet­ing glim­mer, but its ef­fect was in­de­scrib­able. The cap­tain stood up and took one last look at these im­mense plains; then his hand sig­naled me to fol­low him.</p>
				<p>We went swiftly down the moun­tain. Once past the pet­ri­fied for­est, I could see the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i>’s bea­con twin­kling like a star. The cap­tain walked straight to­ward it, and we were back on board just as the first glim­mers of dawn were whiten­ing the sur­face of the ocean.</p>
			</section>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
