<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="en-US" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: http://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Chapter 15</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="part-2" epub:type="part">
			<section id="chapter-2-15" epub:type="chapter">
				<h3 epub:type="title">
					<span class="first-child" epub:type="z3998:roman">XV</span>
					<span class="epub-type-subtitle" epub:type="subtitle">Accident or Incident?</span>
				</h3>
				<p>The next day, March 22, at six o’clock in the morn­ing, prepa­ra­tions for de­par­ture be­gan. The last gleams of twi­light were melt­ing into night. The cold was brisk. The con­stel­la­tions were glit­ter­ing with star­tling in­ten­sity. The won­der­ful South­ern Cross, po­lar star of the Antarc­tic re­gions, twin­kled at its zenith.</p>
				<p>The ther­mome­ter marked −12° centi­grade, and a fresh breeze left a sharp nip in the air. Ice floes were in­creas­ing over the open wa­ter. The sea was start­ing to con­geal ev­ery­where. Numer­ous black­ish patches were spread­ing over its sur­face, an­nounc­ing the im­mi­nent for­ma­tion of fresh ice. Ob­vi­ously this south­ern­most basin froze over dur­ing its six-month win­ter and be­came ut­terly in­ac­ces­si­ble. What hap­pened to the whales dur­ing this pe­riod? No doubt they went be­neath the Ice Bank to find more fea­si­ble seas. As for seals and wal­ruses, they were ac­cus­tomed to liv­ing in the harsh­est cli­mates and stayed on in these icy wa­ter­ways. Th­ese an­i­mals know by in­stinct how to gouge holes in the ice fields and keep them con­tin­u­ally open; they go to these holes to breathe. Once the birds have mi­grated north­ward to es­cape the cold, these ma­rine mam­mals re­main as sole lords of the po­lar con­ti­nent.</p>
				<p>Mean­while the bal­last tanks filled with wa­ter and the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i> sank slowly. At a depth of 1,000 feet, it stopped. Its pro­pel­ler churned the waves and it headed due north at a speed of fif­teen miles per hour. Near the af­ter­noon it was al­ready cruis­ing un­der the im­mense frozen cara­pace of the Ice Bank.</p>
				<p>As a pre­cau­tion, the pan­els in the lounge stayed closed, be­cause the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i>’s hull could run afoul of some sub­merged block of ice. So I spent the day putting my notes into fi­nal form. My mind was com­pletely wrapped up in my mem­o­ries of the pole. We had reached that in­ac­ces­si­ble spot with­out fac­ing ex­haus­tion or dan­ger, as if our seago­ing pas­sen­ger car­riage had glided there on rail­road tracks. And now we had ac­tu­ally started our re­turn jour­ney. Did it still have com­pa­ra­ble sur­prises in store for me? I felt sure it did, so in­ex­haustible is this se­ries of un­der­wa­ter won­ders! As it was, in the five and a half months since fate had brought us on board, we had cleared 14,000 leagues, and over this track longer than the earth’s equa­tor, so many fas­ci­nat­ing or fright­en­ing in­ci­dents had be­guiled our voy­age: that hunt­ing trip in the Cre­spo forests, our run­ning aground in the Tor­res Strait, the coral ceme­tery, the pearl fish­eries of Cey­lon, the Ara­bic tun­nel, the fires of San­torini, those mil­lions in the Bay of Vigo, At­lantis, the South Pole! Dur­ing the night all these mem­o­ries crossed over from one dream to the next, not giv­ing my brain a mo­ment’s rest.</p>
				<p>At three o’clock in the morn­ing, I was awak­ened by a vi­o­lent col­li­sion. I sat up in bed, lis­ten­ing in the dark­ness, and then was sud­denly hurled into the mid­dle of my state­room. Ap­par­ently the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i> had gone aground, then heeled over sharply.</p>
				<p>Lean­ing against the walls, I dragged my­self down the gang­ways to the lounge, whose ceil­ing lights were on. The fur­ni­ture had been knocked over. For­tu­nately the glass cases were solidly se­cured at the base and had stood fast. Since we were no longer ver­ti­cal, the star­board pic­tures were glued to the ta­pes­tries, while those to port had their lower edges hang­ing a foot away from the wall. So the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i> was ly­ing on its star­board side, com­pletely sta­tion­ary to boot.</p>
				<p>In its in­te­rior I heard the sound of foot­steps and muf­fled voices. But Cap­tain Nemo didn’t ap­pear. Just as I was about to leave the lounge, Ned Land and Con­seil en­tered.</p>
				<p>“What hap­pened?” I in­stantly said to them.</p>
				<p>“I came to ask mas­ter that,” Con­seil replied.</p>
				<p>“Dam­na­tion!” the Cana­dian ex­claimed. “I know full well what hap­pened! The <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i> has gone aground, and judg­ing from the way it’s list­ing, I don’t think it’ll pull through like that first time in the Tor­res Strait.”</p>
				<p>“But,” I asked, “are we at least back on the sur­face of the sea?”</p>
				<p>“We have no idea,” Con­seil replied.</p>
				<p>“It’s easy to find out,” I an­swered.</p>
				<p>I con­sulted the pres­sure gauge. Much to my sur­prise, it in­di­cated a depth of 360 me­ters.</p>
				<p>“What’s the mean­ing of this?” I ex­claimed.</p>
				<p>“We must con­fer with Cap­tain Nemo,” Con­seil said.</p>
				<p>“But where do we find him?” Ned Land asked.</p>
				<p>“Fol­low me,” I told my two com­pan­ions.</p>
				<p>We left the lounge. No­body in the li­brary. No­body by the cen­tral com­pan­ion­way or the crew’s quar­ters. I as­sumed that Cap­tain Nemo was sta­tioned in the pi­lot­house. Best to wait. The three of us re­turned to the lounge.</p>
				<p>I’ll skip over the Cana­dian’s com­plaints. He had good grounds for an out­burst. I didn’t an­swer him back, let­ting him blow off all the steam he wanted.</p>
				<p>We had been left to our­selves for twenty min­utes, try­ing to de­tect the tini­est noises in­side the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i>, when Cap­tain Nemo en­tered. He didn’t seem to see us. His fa­cial fea­tures, usu­ally so emo­tion­less, re­vealed a cer­tain un­easi­ness. He stud­ied the com­pass and pres­sure gauge in si­lence, then went and put his fin­ger on the world map at a spot in the sec­tor de­pict­ing the south­ern­most seas.</p>
				<p>I hes­i­tated to in­ter­rupt him. But some mo­ments later, when he turned to me, I threw back at him a phrase he had used in the Tor­res Strait:</p>
				<p>“An in­ci­dent, cap­tain?”</p>
				<p>“No, sir,” he replied, “this time an ac­ci­dent.”</p>
				<p>“Se­ri­ous?”</p>
				<p>“Per­haps.”</p>
				<p>“Is there any im­me­di­ate dan­ger?”</p>
				<p>“No.”</p>
				<p>“The <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i> has run aground?”</p>
				<p>“Yes.”</p>
				<p>“And this ac­ci­dent came about … ?”</p>
				<p>“Through na­ture’s un­pre­dictabil­ity, not man’s in­ca­pac­ity. No er­rors were com­mit­ted in our ma­neu­vers. Nev­er­the­less, we can’t pre­vent a loss of bal­ance from tak­ing its toll. One may defy hu­man laws, but no one can with­stand the laws of na­ture.”</p>
				<p>Cap­tain Nemo had picked an odd time to phi­los­o­phize. All in all, this re­ply told me noth­ing.</p>
				<p>“May I learn, sir,” I asked him, “what caused this ac­ci­dent?”</p>
				<p>“An enor­mous block of ice, an en­tire moun­tain, has top­pled over,” he an­swered me. “When an ice­berg is eroded at the base by warmer wa­ters or by re­peated col­li­sions, its cen­ter of grav­ity rises. Then it som­er­saults, it turns com­pletely up­side down. That’s what hap­pened here. When it over­turned, one of these blocks hit the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i> as it was cruis­ing un­der the wa­ters. Slid­ing un­der our hull, this block then raised us with ir­re­sistible power, lift­ing us into less con­gested strata where we now lie on our side.”</p>
				<p>“But can’t we float the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i> clear by emp­ty­ing its bal­last tanks, to re­gain our bal­ance?”</p>
				<p>“That, sir, is be­ing done right now. You can hear the pumps work­ing. Look at the nee­dle on the pres­sure gauge. It in­di­cates that the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i> is ris­ing, but this block of ice is ris­ing with us, and un­til some ob­sta­cle halts its up­ward move­ment, our po­si­tion won’t change.”</p>
				<p>In­deed, the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i> kept the same heel to star­board. No doubt it would straighten up once the block came to a halt. But be­fore that hap­pened, who knew if we might not hit the un­der­belly of the Ice Bank and be hideously squeezed be­tween two frozen sur­faces?</p>
				<p>I mused on all the con­se­quences of this sit­u­a­tion. Cap­tain Nemo didn’t stop study­ing the pres­sure gauge. Since the top­pling of this ice­berg, the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i> had risen about 150 feet, but it still stayed at the same an­gle to the per­pen­dic­u­lar.</p>
				<p>Sud­denly a slight move­ment could be felt over the hull. Ob­vi­ously the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i> was straight­en­ing a bit. Ob­jects hang­ing in the lounge were vis­i­bly re­turn­ing to their nor­mal po­si­tions. The walls were ap­proach­ing the ver­ti­cal. No­body said a word. Hearts pound­ing, we could see and feel the ship right­ing it­self. The floor was be­com­ing hor­i­zon­tal be­neath our feet. Ten min­utes went by.</p>
				<p>“Fi­nally, we’re up­right!” I ex­claimed.</p>
				<p>“Yes,” Cap­tain Nemo said, head­ing to the lounge door.</p>
				<p>“But will we float off?” I asked him.</p>
				<p>“Cer­tainly,” he replied, “since the bal­last tanks aren’t yet empty, and when they are, the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i> must rise to the sur­face of the sea.”</p>
				<p>The cap­tain went out, and soon I saw that at his or­ders, the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i> had halted its up­ward move­ment. In fact, it soon would have hit the un­der­belly of the Ice Bank, but it had stopped in time and was float­ing in mid­wa­ter.</p>
				<p>“That was a close call!” Con­seil then said.</p>
				<p>“Yes. We could have been crushed be­tween these masses of ice, or at least im­pris­oned be­tween them. And then, with no way to re­new our air sup­ply … Yes, that was a close call!”</p>
				<p>“If it’s over with!” Ned Land mut­tered.</p>
				<p>I was un­will­ing to get into a point­less ar­gu­ment with the Cana­dian and didn’t re­ply. More­over, the pan­els opened just then, and the out­side light burst through the un­cov­ered win­dows.</p>
				<p>We were fully afloat, as I have said; but on both sides of the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i>, about ten me­ters away, there rose daz­zling walls of ice. There also were walls above and be­low. Above, be­cause the Ice Bank’s un­der­belly spread over us like an im­mense ceil­ing. Below, be­cause the som­er­sault­ing block, shift­ing lit­tle by lit­tle, had found points of pur­chase on both side walls and had got­ten jammed be­tween them. The <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i> was im­pris­oned in a gen­uine tun­nel of ice about twenty me­ters wide and filled with quiet wa­ter. So the ship could eas­ily exit by go­ing ei­ther ahead or astern, sink­ing a few hun­dred me­ters deeper, and then tak­ing an open pas­sage­way be­neath the Ice Bank.</p>
				<p>The ceil­ing lights were off, yet the lounge was still brightly lit. This was due to the re­flect­ing power of the walls of ice, which threw the beams of our bea­con right back at us. Words can­not de­scribe the ef­fects pro­duced by our gal­vanic rays on these huge, whim­si­cally sculpted blocks, whose ev­ery an­gle, ridge, and facet gave off a dif­fer­ent glow de­pend­ing on the na­ture of the veins run­ning in­side the ice. It was a daz­zling mine of gems, in par­tic­u­lar sap­phires and emer­alds, whose jets of blue and green criss­crossed. Here and there, opa­line hues of in­fi­nite sub­tlety raced among sparks of light that were like so many fiery di­a­monds, their bril­liance more than any eye could stand. The power of our bea­con was in­creased a hun­dred­fold, like a lamp shin­ing through the bi­con­vex lenses of a world-class light­house.</p>
				<p>“How beau­ti­ful!” Con­seil ex­claimed.</p>
				<p>“Yes,” I said, “it’s a won­der­ful sight! Isn’t it, Ned?”</p>
				<p>“Oh damna­tion, yes!” Ned Land shot back. “It’s su­perb! I’m fu­ri­ous that I have to ad­mit it. No­body has ever seen the like. But this sight could cost us dearly. And in all hon­esty, I think we’re look­ing at things God never in­tended for hu­man eyes.”</p>
				<p>Ned was right. It was too beau­ti­ful. All at once a yell from Con­seil made me turn around.</p>
				<p>“What is it?” I asked.</p>
				<p>“Master must close his eyes! Master mustn’t look!”</p>
				<p>With that, Con­seil clapped his hands over his eyes.</p>
				<p>“But what’s wrong, my boy?”</p>
				<p>“I’ve been daz­zled, struck blind!”</p>
				<p>In­vol­un­tar­ily my eyes flew to the win­dow, but I couldn’t stand the fire de­vour­ing it.</p>
				<p>I re­al­ized what had hap­pened. The <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i> had just started off at great speed. All the tran­quil glim­mers of the ice walls had then changed into blaz­ing streaks. The sparkles from these myr­i­ads of di­a­monds were merg­ing with each other. Swept along by its pro­pel­ler, the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i> was trav­el­ing through a sheath of flash­ing light.</p>
				<p>Then the pan­els in the lounge closed. We kept our hands over our eyes, which were ut­terly sat­u­rated with those con­cen­tric gleams that swirl be­fore the retina when sun­light strikes it too in­tensely. It took some time to calm our trou­bled vi­sion.</p>
				<p>Fi­nally we low­ered our hands.</p>
				<p>“Ye gods, I never would have be­lieved it,” Con­seil said.</p>
				<p>“And I still don’t be­lieve it!” the Cana­dian shot back.</p>
				<p>“When we re­turn to shore, jaded from all these nat­u­ral won­ders,” Con­seil added, “think how we’ll look down on those piti­ful land masses, those puny works of man! No, the civ­i­lized world won’t be good enough for us!”</p>
				<p>Such words from the lips of this emo­tion­less Flem­ish boy showed that our en­thu­si­asm was near the boil­ing point. But the Cana­dian didn’t fail to throw his dram of cold wa­ter over us.</p>
				<p>“The civ­i­lized world!” he said, shak­ing his head. “Don’t worry, Con­seil my friend, we’re never go­ing back to that world!”</p>
				<p>By this point it was five o’clock in the morn­ing. Just then there was a col­li­sion in the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i>’s bow. I re­al­ized that its spur had just bumped a block of ice. It must have been a faulty ma­neu­ver be­cause this un­der­wa­ter tun­nel was ob­structed by such blocks and didn’t make for easy nav­i­gat­ing. So I had as­sumed that Cap­tain Nemo, in ad­just­ing his course, would go around each ob­sta­cle or would hug the walls and fol­low the wind­ings of the tun­nel. In ei­ther case our for­ward mo­tion wouldn’t re­ceive an ab­so­lute check. Nev­er­the­less, con­trary to my ex­pec­ta­tions, the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i> def­i­nitely be­gan to move back­ward.</p>
				<p>“We’re go­ing astern?” Con­seil said.</p>
				<p>“Yes,” I replied. “Ap­par­ently the tun­nel has no way out at this end.”</p>
				<p>“And so … ?”</p>
				<p>“So,” I said, “our ma­neu­vers are quite sim­ple. We’ll re­turn in our tracks and go out the south­ern open­ing. That’s all.”</p>
				<p>As I spoke, I tried to sound more con­fi­dent than I re­ally felt. Mean­while the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i> ac­cel­er­ated its back­ward move­ment, and run­ning with pro­pel­ler in re­verse, it swept us along at great speed.</p>
				<p>“This’ll mean a de­lay,” Ned said.</p>
				<p>“What are a few hours more or less, so long as we get out.”</p>
				<p>“Yes,” Ned Land re­peated, “so long as we get out!”</p>
				<p>I strolled for a lit­tle while from the lounge into the li­brary. My com­pan­ions kept their seats and didn’t move. Soon I threw my­self down on a couch and picked up a book, which my eyes skimmed me­chan­i­cally.</p>
				<p>A quar­ter of an hour later, Con­seil ap­proached me, say­ing:</p>
				<p>“Is it deeply fas­ci­nat­ing, this vol­ume mas­ter is read­ing?”</p>
				<p>“Tre­men­dously fas­ci­nat­ing,” I replied.</p>
				<p>“I be­lieve it. Master is read­ing his own book!”</p>
				<p>“My own book?”</p>
				<p>In­deed, my hands were hold­ing my own work on the great ocean depths. I hadn’t even sus­pected. I closed the book and re­sumed my strolling. Ned and Con­seil stood up to leave.</p>
				<p>“Stay here, my friends,” I said, stop­ping them. “Let’s stay to­gether un­til we’re out of this blind al­ley.”</p>
				<p>“As mas­ter wishes,” Con­seil replied.</p>
				<p>The hours passed. I of­ten stud­ied the in­stru­ments hang­ing on the lounge wall. The pres­sure gauge in­di­cated that the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i> stayed at a con­stant depth of 300 me­ters, the com­pass that it kept head­ing south, the log that it was trav­el­ing at a speed of twenty miles per hour, an ex­ces­sive speed in such a cramped area. But Cap­tain Nemo knew that by this point there was no such thing as too fast, since min­utes were now worth cen­turies.</p>
				<p>At 8:25 a sec­ond col­li­sion took place. This time astern. I grew pale. My com­pan­ions came over. I clutched Con­seil’s hand. Our eyes ques­tioned each other, and more di­rectly than if our thoughts had been trans­lated into words.</p>
				<p>Just then the cap­tain en­tered the lounge. I went to him.</p>
				<p>“Our path is barred to the south?” I asked him.</p>
				<p>“Yes, sir. When it over­turned, that ice­berg closed off ev­ery exit.”</p>
				<p>“We’re boxed in?”</p>
				<p>“Yes.”</p>
			</section>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
