<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="en-US" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: http://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Chapter 15</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="part-1" epub:type="part">
			<section id="chapter-1-15" epub:type="chapter">
				<h3 epub:type="title">
					<span class="first-child" epub:type="z3998:roman">XV</span>
					<span class="epub-type-subtitle" epub:type="subtitle">An Invitation in Writing</span>
				</h3>
				<p>The next day, Novem­ber 9, I woke up only af­ter a long, twelve-hour slum­ber. Con­seil, a crea­ture of habit, came to ask “how mas­ter’s night went,” and to of­fer his ser­vices. He had left his Cana­dian friend sleep­ing like a man who had never done any­thing else.</p>
				<p>I let the gal­lant lad bab­ble as he pleased, with­out giv­ing him much in the way of a re­ply. I was con­cerned about Cap­tain Nemo’s ab­sence dur­ing our ses­sion the pre­vi­ous af­ter­noon, and I hoped to see him again to­day.</p>
				<p>Soon I had put on my clothes, which were wo­ven from strands of seashell tis­sue. More than once their com­po­si­tion pro­voked com­ments from Con­seil. I in­formed him that they were made from the smooth, silken fil­a­ments with which the fan mus­sel, a type of seashell quite abun­dant along Mediter­ranean beaches, at­taches it­self to rocks. In olden times, fine fab­rics, stock­ings, and gloves were made from such fil­a­ments, be­cause they were both very soft and very warm. So the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i>’s crew could dress them­selves at lit­tle cost, with­out need­ing a thing from cot­ton grow­ers, sheep, or silk­worms on shore.</p>
				<p>As soon as I was dressed, I made my way to the main lounge. It was de­serted.</p>
				<p>I dove into study­ing the con­cho­log­i­cal trea­sures amassed in­side the glass cases. I also in­ves­ti­gated the huge plant al­bums that were filled with the rarest ma­rine herbs, which, al­though they were pressed and dried, still kept their won­der­ful col­ors. Among these valu­able wa­ter plants, I noted var­i­ous sea­weed: some <i epub:type="z3998:taxonomy">Cla­doste­phus ver­ti­cil­la­tus</i>, pea­cock’s tails, fig-leafed caulerpa, grain-bear­ing beauty bushes, del­i­cate rose­tan­gle tinted scar­let, sea colan­der ar­ranged into fan shapes, mer­maid’s cups that looked like the caps of squat mush­rooms and for years had been clas­si­fied among the zoophytes; in short, a com­plete se­ries of al­gae.</p>
				<p>The en­tire day passed with­out my be­ing hon­ored by a visit from Cap­tain Nemo. The pan­els in the lounge didn’t open. Per­haps they didn’t want us to get tired of these beau­ti­ful things.</p>
				<p>The <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i> kept to an east-north­east­erly head­ing, a speed of twelve miles per hour, and a depth be­tween fifty and sixty me­ters.</p>
				<p>Next day, Novem­ber 10: the same ne­glect, the same soli­tude. I didn’t see a soul from the crew. Ned and Con­seil spent the bet­ter part of the day with me. They were as­ton­ished at the cap­tain’s in­ex­pli­ca­ble ab­sence. Was this ec­cen­tric man ill? Did he want to change his plans con­cern­ing us?</p>
				<p>But af­ter all, as Con­seil noted, we en­joyed com­plete free­dom, we were dain­tily and abun­dantly fed. Our host had kept to the terms of his agree­ment. We couldn’t com­plain, and more­over the very unique­ness of our sit­u­a­tion had such gen­er­ous re­wards in store for us, we had no grounds for crit­i­cism.</p>
				<p>That day I started my di­ary of these ad­ven­tures, which has en­abled me to nar­rate them with the most scrupu­lous ac­cu­racy; and one odd de­tail: I wrote it on pa­per man­u­fac­tured from ma­rine eel­grass.</p>
				<p>Early in the morn­ing on Novem­ber 11, fresh air poured through the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i>’s in­te­rior, in­form­ing me that we had re­turned to the sur­face of the ocean to re­new our oxy­gen sup­ply. I headed for the cen­tral com­pan­ion­way and climbed onto the plat­form.</p>
				<p>It was six o’clock. I found the weather over­cast, the sea gray but calm. Hardly a bil­low. I hoped to en­counter Cap­tain Nemo there—would he come? I saw only the helms­man im­pris­oned in his glass-win­dowed pi­lot­house. Seated on the ledge fur­nished by the hull of the skiff, I in­haled the sea’s salty aroma with great plea­sure.</p>
				<p>Lit­tle by lit­tle, the mists were dis­persed un­der the ac­tion of the sun’s rays. The ra­di­ant orb cleared the east­ern hori­zon. Un­der its gaze, the sea caught on fire like a trail of gun­pow­der. Scat­tered on high, the clouds were col­ored in bright, won­der­fully shaded hues, and nu­mer­ous “la­dyfin­gers” warned of day­long winds.<a class="epub-type-noteref" href="../text/endnotes.xhtml#note-10" id="note-10" epub:type="noteref">10</a></p>
				<p>But what were mere winds to this <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i>, which no storms could in­tim­i­date!</p>
				<p>So I was mar­veling at this de­light­ful sun­rise, so life-giv­ing and cheer­ful, when I heard some­one climb­ing onto the plat­form.</p>
				<p>I was pre­pared to greet Cap­tain Nemo, but it was his chief of­fi­cer who ap­peared—whom I had al­ready met dur­ing our first visit with the cap­tain. He ad­vanced over the plat­form, not seem­ing to no­tice my pres­ence. A pow­er­ful spy­glass to his eye, he scru­ti­nized ev­ery point of the hori­zon with the ut­most care. Then, his ex­am­i­na­tion over, he ap­proached the hatch and pro­nounced a phrase whose ex­act word­ing fol­lows be­low. I re­mem­ber it be­cause, ev­ery morn­ing, it was re­peated un­der the same cir­cum­stances. It ran like this:</p>
				<blockquote lang="x-nemo" xml:lang="x-nemo">
					<p class="first-child">“Nautron re­spoc lorni virch.”</p>
				</blockquote>
				<p>What it meant I was un­able to say.</p>
				<p>Th­ese words pro­nounced, the chief of­fi­cer went be­low again. I thought the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i> was about to re­sume its un­der­wa­ter nav­i­gat­ing. So I went down the hatch and back through the gang­ways to my state­room.</p>
				<p>Five days passed in this way with no change in our sit­u­a­tion. Every morn­ing I climbed onto the plat­form. The same phrase was pro­nounced by the same in­di­vid­ual. Cap­tain Nemo did not ap­pear.</p>
				<p>I was pur­su­ing the pol­icy that we had seen the last of him, when on Novem­ber 16, while reen­ter­ing my state­room with Ned and Con­seil, I found a note ad­dressed to me on the ta­ble.</p>
				<p>I opened it im­pa­tiently. It was writ­ten in a script that was clear and neat but a bit “Old English” in style, its char­ac­ters re­mind­ing me of Ger­man cal­lig­ra­phy.</p>
				<p>The note was worded as fol­lows:</p>
				<blockquote class="epub-type-z3998-letter" epub:type="z3998:letter">
					<header class="epub-type-se-letter.dateline" epub:type="se:letter.dateline">
						<p class="first-child">Pro­fes­sor Aron­nax</p>
						<p>Aboard the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i></p>
						<p>Novem­ber 16, 1867</p>
					</header>
					<p class="epub-type-se-letter.body" epub:type="se:letter.body">Cap­tain Nemo in­vites Pro­fes­sor Aron­nax on a hunt­ing trip that will take place to­mor­row morn­ing in his Cre­spo Is­land forests. He hopes noth­ing will pre­vent the pro­fes­sor from at­tend­ing, and he looks for­ward with plea­sure to the pro­fes­sor’s com­pan­ions join­ing him.</p>
					<footer class="epub-type-z3998-valediction" epub:type="z3998:valediction">
						<p class="signature first-child">Cap­tain Nemo,</p>
						<p>Com­man­der of the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i>.</p>
					</footer>
				</blockquote>
				<p>“A hunt­ing trip!” Ned ex­claimed.</p>
				<p>“And in his forests on Cre­spo Is­land!” Con­seil added.</p>
				<p>“But does this mean the old boy goes ashore?” Ned Land went on.</p>
				<p>“That seems to be the gist of it,” I said, reread­ing the let­ter.</p>
				<p>“Well, we’ve got to ac­cept!” the Cana­dian an­swered. “Once we’re on solid ground, we’ll fig­ure out a course of ac­tion. Be­sides, it wouldn’t pain me to eat a cou­ple slices of fresh veni­son!”</p>
				<p>Without try­ing to rec­on­cile the con­tra­dic­tions be­tween Cap­tain Nemo’s pro­fessed hor­ror of con­ti­nents or is­lands and his in­vi­ta­tion to go hunt­ing in a for­est, I was con­tent to re­ply:</p>
				<p>“First let’s look into this Cre­spo Is­land.”</p>
				<p>I con­sulted the world map; and in lat­i­tude 32° 40′ north and lon­gi­tude 167° 50′ west, I found an islet that had been dis­cov­ered in 1801 by Cap­tain Cre­spo, which old Span­ish charts called Rocca de la Plata, in other words, “Sil­ver Rock.” So we were about 1,800 miles from our start­ing point, and by a slight change of head­ing, the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i> was bring­ing us back to­ward the south­east.</p>
				<p>I showed my com­pan­ions this small, stray rock in the mid­dle of the north Pa­cific.</p>
				<p>“If Cap­tain Nemo does some­times go ashore,” I told them, “at least he only picks desert is­lands!”</p>
				<p>Ned Land shook his head with­out re­ply­ing; then he and Con­seil left me. After sup­per was served me by the mute and emo­tion­less stew­ard, I fell asleep; but not with­out some anx­i­eties.</p>
				<p>When I woke up the next day, Novem­ber 17, I sensed that the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i> was com­pletely mo­tion­less. I dressed hur­riedly and en­tered the main lounge.</p>
				<p>Cap­tain Nemo was there wait­ing for me. He stood up, bowed, and asked if it suited me to come along.</p>
				<p>Since he made no al­lu­sion to his ab­sence the past eight days, I also re­frained from men­tion­ing it, and I sim­ply an­swered that my com­pan­ions and I were ready to go with him.</p>
				<p>“Only, sir,” I added, “I’ll take the lib­erty of ad­dress­ing a ques­tion to you.”</p>
				<p>“Ad­dress away, Pro­fes­sor Aron­nax, and if I’m able to an­swer, I will.”</p>
				<p>“Well then, cap­tain, how is it that you’ve sev­ered all ties with the shore, yet you own forests on Cre­spo Is­land?”</p>
				<p>“Pro­fes­sor,” the cap­tain an­swered me, “these forests of mine don’t bask in the heat and light of the sun. They aren’t fre­quented by li­ons, tigers, pan­thers, or other quadrupeds. They’re known only to me. They grow only for me. Th­ese forests aren’t on land, they’re ac­tual un­der­wa­ter forests.”</p>
				<p>“Un­der­wa­ter forests!” I ex­claimed.</p>
				<p>“Yes, pro­fes­sor.”</p>
				<p>“And you’re of­fer­ing to take me to them?”</p>
				<p>“Pre­cisely.”</p>
				<p>“On foot?”</p>
				<p>“Without get­ting your feet wet.”</p>
				<p>“While hunt­ing?”</p>
				<p>“While hunt­ing.”</p>
				<p>“Ri­fles in hand?”</p>
				<p>“Ri­fles in hand.”</p>
				<p>I stared at the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i>’s com­man­der with an air any­thing but flat­ter­ing to the man.</p>
				<p>“As­suredly,” I said to my­self, “he’s con­tracted some men­tal ill­ness. He’s had a fit that’s lasted eight days and isn’t over even yet. What a shame! I liked him bet­ter ec­cen­tric than in­sane!”</p>
				<p>Th­ese thoughts were clearly read­able on my face; but Cap­tain Nemo re­mained con­tent with invit­ing me to fol­low him, and I did so like a man re­signed to the worst.</p>
				<p>We ar­rived at the din­ing room, where we found break­fast served.</p>
				<p>“Pro­fes­sor Aron­nax,” the cap­tain told me, “I beg you to share my break­fast with­out for­mal­ity. We can chat while we eat. Be­cause, al­though I promised you a stroll in my forests, I made no pledge to ar­range for your en­coun­ter­ing a restau­rant there. Ac­cord­ingly, eat your break­fast like a man who’ll prob­a­bly eat din­ner only when it’s ex­tremely late.”</p>
				<p>I did jus­tice to this meal. It was made up of var­i­ous fish and some slices of sea cu­cum­ber, that praise­wor­thy zoophyte, all gar­nished with such highly ap­pe­tiz­ing sea­weed as the <i epub:type="z3998:taxonomy">Por­phyra lacini­ata</i> and the <i epub:type="z3998:taxonomy">Lau­ren­cia pri­mafetida</i>. Our bev­er­age con­sisted of clear wa­ter to which, fol­low­ing the cap­tain’s ex­am­ple, I added some drops of a fer­mented liquor ex­tracted by the Kam­chatka process from the sea­weed known by name as <i epub:type="z3998:taxonomy">Rhody­menia pal­mata</i>.</p>
				<p>At first Cap­tain Nemo ate with­out pro­nounc­ing a sin­gle word. Then he told me:</p>
				<p>“Pro­fes­sor, when I pro­posed that you go hunt­ing in my Cre­spo forests, you thought I was con­tra­dict­ing my­self. When I in­formed you that it was an is­sue of un­der­wa­ter forests, you thought I’d gone in­sane. Pro­fes­sor, you must never make snap judg­ments about your fel­low man.”</p>
				<p>“But, cap­tain, be­lieve me—”</p>
				<p>“Kindly lis­ten to me, and you’ll see if you have grounds for ac­cus­ing me of in­san­ity or self-con­tra­dic­tion.”</p>
				<p>“I’m all at­ten­tion.”</p>
				<p>“Pro­fes­sor, you know as well as I do that a man can live un­der­wa­ter so long as he car­ries with him his own sup­ply of breath­able air. For un­der­wa­ter work projects, the work­man wears a wa­ter­proof suit with his head im­pris­oned in a metal cap­sule, while he re­ceives air from above by means of force pumps and flow reg­u­la­tors.”</p>
				<p>“That’s the stan­dard equip­ment for a div­ing suit,” I said.</p>
				<p>“Cor­rect, but un­der such con­di­tions the man has no free­dom. He’s at­tached to a pump that sends him air through an in­dia-rub­ber hose; it’s an ac­tual chain that fet­ters him to the shore, and if we were to be bound in this way to the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i>, we couldn’t go far ei­ther.”</p>
				<p>“Then how do you break free?” I asked.</p>
				<p>“We use the Rouquay­rol-De­nay­rouze de­vice, in­vented by two of your fel­low coun­try­men but re­fined by me for my own spe­cial uses, thereby en­abling you to risk these new phys­i­o­log­i­cal con­di­tions with­out suf­fer­ing any or­ganic dis­or­ders. It con­sists of a tank built from heavy sheet iron in which I store air un­der a pres­sure of fifty at­mos­pheres. This tank is fas­tened to the back by means of straps, like a sol­dier’s knap­sack. Its top part forms a box where the air is reg­u­lated by a bel­lows mech­a­nism and can be re­leased only at its proper ten­sion. In the Rouquay­rol de­vice that has been in gen­eral use, two in­dia-rub­ber hoses leave this box and feed to a kind of tent that im­pris­ons the op­er­a­tor’s nose and mouth; one hose is for the en­trance of air to be in­haled, the other for the exit of air to be ex­haled, and the tongue closes off the for­mer or the lat­ter de­pend­ing on the breather’s needs. But in my case, since I face con­sid­er­able pres­sures at the bot­tom of the sea, I needed to en­close my head in a cop­per sphere, like those found on stan­dard div­ing suits, and the two hoses for in­hala­tion and ex­ha­la­tion now feed to that sphere.”</p>
				<p>“That’s per­fect, Cap­tain Nemo, but the air you carry must be quickly de­pleted; and once it con­tains no more than 15% oxy­gen, it be­comes un­fit for breath­ing.”</p>
				<p>“Surely, but as I told you, Pro­fes­sor Aron­nax, the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i>’s pumps en­able me to store air un­der con­sid­er­able pres­sure, and given this cir­cum­stance, the tank on my div­ing equip­ment can sup­ply breath­able air for nine or ten hours.”</p>
				<p>“I’ve no more ob­jec­tions to raise,” I replied. “I’ll only ask you, cap­tain: how can you light your way at the bot­tom of the ocean?”</p>
				<p>“With the Ruhmko­rff de­vice, Pro­fes­sor Aron­nax. If the first is car­ried on the back, the sec­ond is fas­tened to the belt. It con­sists of a Bun­sen bat­tery that I ac­ti­vate not with potas­sium dichro­mate but with sodium. An in­duc­tion coil gath­ers the elec­tric­ity gen­er­ated and di­rects it to a spe­cially de­signed lantern. In this lantern one finds a glass spi­ral that con­tains only a residue of car­bon diox­ide gas. When the de­vice is op­er­at­ing, this gas be­comes lu­mi­nous and gives off a con­tin­u­ous whitish light. Thus pro­vided for, I breathe and I see.”</p>
				<p>“Cap­tain Nemo, to my ev­ery ob­jec­tion you give such crush­ing an­swers, I’m afraid to en­ter­tain a sin­gle doubt. How­ever, though I have no choice but to ac­cept both the Rouquay­rol and Ruhmko­rff de­vices, I’d like to reg­is­ter some reser­va­tions about the ri­fle with which you’ll equip me.”</p>
				<p>“But it isn’t a ri­fle that uses gun­pow­der,” the cap­tain replied.</p>
				<p>“Then it’s an air gun?”</p>
				<p>“Surely. How can I make gun­pow­der on my ship when I have no salt­peter, sul­fur, or char­coal?”</p>
				<p>“Even so,” I replied, “to fire un­der­wa­ter in a medium that’s 855 times denser than air, you’d have to over­come con­sid­er­able re­sis­tance.”</p>
				<p>“That doesn’t nec­es­sar­ily fol­low. There are cer­tain Ful­ton-style guns per­fected by the English­men Philippe-Coles and Bur­ley, the French­man Furcy, and the Ital­ian Landi; they’re equipped with a spe­cial sys­tem of air­tight fas­ten­ings and can fire in un­der­wa­ter con­di­tions. But I re­peat: hav­ing no gun­pow­der, I’ve re­placed it with air at high pres­sure, which is abun­dantly sup­plied me by the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i>’s pumps.”</p>
				<p>“But this air must be swiftly de­pleted.”</p>
				<p>“Well, in a pinch can’t my Rouquay­rol tank sup­ply me with more? All I have to do is draw it from an ad hoc spigot. Be­sides, Pro­fes­sor Aron­nax, you’ll see for your­self that dur­ing these un­der­wa­ter hunt­ing trips, we make no great ex­pen­di­ture of ei­ther air or bul­lets.”</p>
				<p>“But it seems to me that in this semi­dark­ness, amid this liq­uid that’s so dense in com­par­i­son to the at­mos­phere, a gun­shot couldn’t carry far and would prove fa­tal only with dif­fi­culty!”</p>
				<p>“On the con­trary, sir, with this ri­fle ev­ery shot is fa­tal; and as soon as the an­i­mal is hit, no mat­ter how lightly, it falls as if struck by light­ning.”</p>
				<p>“Why?”</p>
				<p>“Be­cause this ri­fle doesn’t shoot or­di­nary bul­lets but lit­tle glass cap­sules in­vented by the Aus­trian chemist Le­niebroek, and I have a con­sid­er­able sup­ply of them. Th­ese glass cap­sules are cov­ered with a strip of steel and weighted with a lead base; they’re gen­uine lit­tle Ley­den jars charged with high-volt­age elec­tric­ity. They go off at the slight­est im­pact, and the an­i­mal, no mat­ter how strong, drops dead. I might add that these cap­sules are no big­ger than num­ber 4 shot, and the cham­ber of any or­di­nary ri­fle could hold ten of them.”</p>
				<p>“I’ll quit de­bat­ing,” I replied, get­ting up from the ta­ble. “And all that’s left is for me to shoul­der my ri­fle. So where you go, I’ll go.”</p>
				<p>Cap­tain Nemo led me to the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i>’s stern, and pass­ing by Ned and Con­seil’s cabin, I sum­moned my two com­pan­ions, who in­stantly fol­lowed us.</p>
				<p>Then we ar­rived at a cell lo­cated within easy ac­cess of the en­gine room; in this cell we were to get dressed for our stroll.</p>
			</section>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
