<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="en-US" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: http://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Chapter 12</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="part-1" epub:type="part">
			<section id="chapter-1-12" epub:type="chapter">
				<h3 epub:type="title">
					<span class="first-child" epub:type="z3998:roman">XII</span>
					<span class="epub-type-subtitle" epub:type="subtitle">Everything Through Electricity</span>
				</h3>
				<p>“Sir,” Cap­tain Nemo said, show­ing me the in­stru­ments hang­ing on the walls of his state­room, “these are the de­vices needed to nav­i­gate the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i>. Here, as in the lounge, I al­ways have them be­fore my eyes, and they in­di­cate my po­si­tion and ex­act head­ing in the midst of the ocean. You’re fa­mil­iar with some of them, such as the ther­mome­ter, which gives the tem­per­a­ture in­side the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i>; the barom­e­ter, which mea­sures the heav­i­ness of the out­side air and fore­casts changes in the weather; the hu­midi­s­tat, which in­di­cates the de­gree of dry­ness in the at­mos­phere; the storm glass, whose mix­ture de­com­poses to fore­tell the ar­rival of tem­pests; the com­pass, which steers my course; the sex­tant, which takes the sun’s al­ti­tude and tells me my lat­i­tude; chronome­ters, which al­low me to cal­cu­late my lon­gi­tude; and fi­nally, spy­glasses for both day and night, en­abling me to scru­ti­nize ev­ery point of the hori­zon once the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i> has risen to the sur­face of the waves.”</p>
				<p>“Th­ese are the nor­mal nav­i­ga­tional in­stru­ments,” I replied, “and I’m fa­mil­iar with their uses. But no doubt these oth­ers an­swer press­ing needs unique to the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i>. That dial I see there, with the nee­dle mov­ing across it—isn’t it a pres­sure gauge?”</p>
				<p>“It is in­deed a pres­sure gauge. It’s placed in con­tact with the wa­ter, and it in­di­cates the out­side pres­sure on our hull, which in turn gives me the depth at which my sub­mersible is sit­ting.”</p>
				<p>“And these are some new breed of sound­ing line?”</p>
				<p>“They’re ther­mo­met­ric sound­ing lines that re­port wa­ter tem­per­a­tures in the dif­fer­ent strata.”</p>
				<p>“And these other in­stru­ments, whose func­tions I can’t even guess?”</p>
				<p>“Here, pro­fes­sor, I need to give you some back­ground in­for­ma­tion,” Cap­tain Nemo said. “So kindly hear me out.”</p>
				<p>He fell silent for some mo­ments, then he said:</p>
				<p>“There’s a pow­er­ful, obe­di­ent, swift, and ef­fort­less force that can be bent to any use and which reigns supreme aboard my ves­sel. It does ev­ery­thing. It lights me, it warms me, it’s the soul of my me­chan­i­cal equip­ment. This force is elec­tric­ity.”</p>
				<p>“Elec­tric­ity!” I ex­claimed in some sur­prise.</p>
				<p>“Yes, sir.”</p>
				<p>“But, cap­tain, you have a tremen­dous speed of move­ment that doesn’t square with the strength of elec­tric­ity. Un­til now, its dy­namic po­ten­tial has re­mained quite lim­ited, ca­pa­ble of pro­duc­ing only small amounts of power!”</p>
				<p>“Pro­fes­sor,” Cap­tain Nemo replied, “my elec­tric­ity isn’t the run-of-the-mill va­ri­ety, and with your per­mis­sion, I’ll leave it at that.”</p>
				<p>“I won’t in­sist, sir, and I’ll rest con­tent with sim­ply be­ing flab­ber­gasted at your re­sults. I would ask one ques­tion, how­ever, which you needn’t an­swer if it’s in­dis­creet. The elec­tric cells you use to gen­er­ate this mar­velous force must be de­pleted very quickly. Their zinc com­po­nent, for ex­am­ple: how do you re­place it, since you no longer stay in con­tact with the shore?”</p>
				<p>“That ques­tion de­serves an an­swer,” Cap­tain Nemo replied. “First off, I’ll men­tion that at the bot­tom of the sea there ex­ist veins of zinc, iron, sil­ver, and gold whose min­ing would quite cer­tainly be fea­si­ble. But I’ve tapped none of these land-based met­als, and I wanted to make de­mands only on the sea it­self for the sources of my elec­tric­ity.”</p>
				<p>“The sea it­self?”</p>
				<p>“Yes, pro­fes­sor, and there was no short­age of such sources. In fact, by es­tab­lish­ing a cir­cuit be­tween two wires im­mersed to dif­fer­ent depths, I’d be able to ob­tain elec­tric­ity through the di­verg­ing tem­per­a­tures they ex­pe­ri­ence; but I pre­ferred to use a more prac­ti­cal pro­ce­dure.”</p>
				<p>“And that is?”</p>
				<p>“You’re fa­mil­iar with the com­po­si­tion of salt wa­ter. In 1,000 grams one finds 96.5% wa­ter and about 2.66% sodium chlo­ride; then small quan­ti­ties of mag­ne­sium chlo­ride, potas­sium chlo­ride, mag­ne­sium bro­mide, sul­fate of mag­ne­sia, cal­cium sul­fate, and cal­cium car­bon­ate. Hence you ob­serve that sodium chlo­ride is en­coun­tered there in sig­nif­i­cant pro­por­tions. Now then, it’s this sodium that I ex­tract from salt wa­ter and with which I com­pose my elec­tric cells.”</p>
				<p>“Sodium?”</p>
				<p>“Yes, sir. Mixed with mer­cury, it forms an amal­gam that takes the place of zinc in Bun­sen cells. The mer­cury is never de­pleted. Only the sodium is con­sumed, and the sea it­self gives me that. Beyond this, I’ll men­tion that sodium bat­ter­ies have been found to gen­er­ate the greater en­ergy, and their elec­tro­mo­tor strength is twice that of zinc bat­ter­ies.”</p>
				<p>“Cap­tain, I fully un­der­stand the ex­cel­lence of sodium un­der the con­di­tions in which you’re placed. The sea con­tains it. Fine. But it still has to be pro­duced, in short, ex­tracted. And how do you ac­com­plish this? Ob­vi­ously your bat­ter­ies could do the ex­tract­ing; but if I’m not mis­taken, the con­sump­tion of sodium needed by your elec­tric equip­ment would be greater than the quan­tity you’d ex­tract. It would come about, then, that in the process of pro­duc­ing your sodium, you’d use up more than you’d make!”</p>
				<p>“Ac­cord­ingly, pro­fes­sor, I don’t ex­tract it with bat­ter­ies; quite sim­ply, I uti­lize the heat of coal from the earth.”</p>
				<p>“From the earth?” I said, my voice go­ing up on the word.</p>
				<p>“We’ll say coal from the seafloor, if you pre­fer,” Cap­tain Nemo replied.</p>
				<p>“And you can mine these veins of un­der­wa­ter coal?”</p>
				<p>“You’ll watch me work them, Pro­fes­sor Aron­nax. I ask only a lit­tle pa­tience of you, since you’ll have am­ple time to be pa­tient. Just re­mem­ber one thing: I owe ev­ery­thing to the ocean; it gen­er­ates elec­tric­ity, and elec­tric­ity gives the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i> heat, light, mo­tion, and, in a word, life it­self.”</p>
				<p>“But not the air you breathe?”</p>
				<p>“Oh, I could pro­duce the air needed on board, but it would be point­less, since I can rise to the sur­face of the sea when­ever I like. How­ever, even though elec­tric­ity doesn’t sup­ply me with breath­able air, it at least op­er­ates the pow­er­ful pumps that store it un­der pres­sure in spe­cial tanks; which, if need be, al­lows me to ex­tend my stay in the lower strata for as long as I want.”</p>
				<p>“Cap­tain,” I replied, “I’ll rest con­tent with mar­veling. You’ve ob­vi­ously found what all mankind will surely find one day, the true dy­namic power of elec­tric­ity.”</p>
				<p>“I’m not so cer­tain they’ll find it,” Cap­tain Nemo replied icily. “But be that as it may, you’re al­ready fa­mil­iar with the first use I’ve found for this valu­able force. It lights us, and with a uni­for­mity and con­ti­nu­ity not even pos­sessed by sun­light. Now, look at that clock: it’s elec­tric, it runs with an ac­cu­racy ri­val­ing the finest chronome­ters. I’ve had it di­vided into twenty-four hours like Ital­ian clocks, since nei­ther day nor night, sun nor moon, ex­ist for me, but only this ar­ti­fi­cial light that I im­port into the depths of the seas! See, right now it’s ten o’clock in the morn­ing.”</p>
				<p>“That’s per­fect.”</p>
				<p>“Another use for elec­tric­ity: that dial hang­ing be­fore our eyes in­di­cates how fast the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i> is go­ing. An elec­tric wire puts it in con­tact with the patent log; this nee­dle shows me the ac­tual speed of my sub­mersible. And … hold on … just now we’re pro­ceed­ing at the mod­er­ate pace of fif­teen miles per hour.”</p>
				<p>“It’s mar­velous,” I replied, “and I truly see, cap­tain, how right you are to use this force; it’s sure to take the place of wind, wa­ter, and steam.”</p>
				<p>“But that’s not all, Pro­fes­sor Aron­nax,” Cap­tain Nemo said, stand­ing up. “And if you’d care to fol­low me, we’ll in­spect the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i>’s stern.”</p>
				<p>In essence, I was al­ready fa­mil­iar with the whole for­ward part of this un­der­wa­ter boat, and here are its ex­act sub­di­vi­sions go­ing from amid­ships to its spur: the din­ing room, 5 me­ters long and sep­a­rated from the li­brary by a wa­ter­tight bulk­head, in other words, it couldn’t be pen­e­trated by the sea; the li­brary, 5 me­ters long; the main lounge, 10 me­ters long, sep­a­rated from the cap­tain’s state­room by a sec­ond wa­ter­tight bulk­head; the afore­said state­room, 5 me­ters long; mine, 2.5 me­ters long; and fi­nally, air tanks 7.5 me­ters long and ex­tend­ing to the stem­post. To­tal: a length of 35 me­ters. Doors were cut into the wa­ter­tight bulk­heads and were shut her­met­i­cally by means of in­dia-rub­ber seals, which in­sured com­plete safety aboard the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i> in the event of a leak in any one sec­tion.</p>
				<p>I fol­lowed Cap­tain Nemo down gang­ways lo­cated for easy tran­sit, and I ar­rived amid­ships. There I found a sort of shaft head­ing up­ward be­tween two wa­ter­tight bulk­heads. An iron lad­der, clamped to the wall, led to the shaft’s up­per end. I asked the cap­tain what this lad­der was for.</p>
				<p>“It goes to the skiff,” he replied.</p>
				<p>“What! You have a skiff?” I replied in some as­ton­ish­ment.</p>
				<p>“Surely. An ex­cel­lent long­boat, light and un­sink­able, which is used for ex­cur­sions and fish­ing trips.”</p>
				<p>“But when you want to set out, don’t you have to re­turn to the sur­face of the sea?”</p>
				<p>“By no means. The skiff is at­tached to the top­side of the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i>’s hull and is set in a cav­ity ex­pressly de­signed to re­ceive it. It’s com­pletely decked over, ab­so­lutely wa­ter­tight, and held solidly in place by bolts. This lad­der leads to a man­hole cut into the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i>’s hull and cor­re­spond­ing to a com­pa­ra­ble hole cut into the side of the skiff. I in­sert my­self through this dou­ble open­ing into the long­boat. My crew close up the hole be­long­ing to the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i>; I close up the one be­long­ing to the skiff, sim­ply by screw­ing it into place. I undo the bolts hold­ing the skiff to the sub­mersible, and the long­boat rises with prodi­gious speed to the sur­face of the sea. I then open the deck pan­el­ing, care­fully closed un­til that point; I up mast and hoist sail—or I take out my oars—and I go for a spin.”</p>
				<p>“But how do you re­turn to the ship?”</p>
				<p>“I don’t, Pro­fes­sor Aron­nax; the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i> re­turns to me.”</p>
				<p>“At your com­mand?”</p>
				<p>“At my com­mand. An elec­tric wire con­nects me to the ship. I fire off a tele­gram, and that’s that.”</p>
				<p>“Right,” I said, tipsy from all these won­ders, “noth­ing to it!”</p>
				<p>After pass­ing the well of the com­pan­ion­way that led to the plat­form, I saw a cabin 2 me­ters long in which Con­seil and Ned Land, en­rap­tured with their meal, were busy de­vour­ing it to the last crumb. Then a door opened into the gal­ley, 3 me­ters long and lo­cated be­tween the ves­sel’s huge stor­age lock­ers.</p>
				<p>There, even more pow­er­ful and obe­di­ent than gas, elec­tric­ity did most of the cook­ing. Ar­riv­ing un­der the stoves, wires trans­mit­ted to plat­inum grid­dles a heat that was dis­trib­uted and sus­tained with per­fect con­sis­tency. It also heated a dis­till­ing mech­a­nism that, via evap­o­ra­tion, sup­plied ex­cel­lent drink­ing wa­ter. Next to this gal­ley was a bath­room, con­ve­niently laid out, with faucets sup­ply­ing hot or cold wa­ter at will.</p>
				<p>After the gal­ley came the crew’s quar­ters, 5 me­ters long. But the door was closed and I couldn’t see its ac­com­mo­da­tions, which might have told me the num­ber of men it took to op­er­ate the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i>.</p>
				<p>At the far end stood a fourth wa­ter­tight bulk­head, sep­a­rat­ing the crew’s quar­ters from the en­gine room. A door opened, and I stood in the com­part­ment where Cap­tain Nemo, in­dis­putably a world-class en­gi­neer, had set up his lo­co­mo­tive equip­ment.</p>
				<p>Brightly lit, the en­gine room mea­sured at least 20 me­ters in length. It was di­vided, by func­tion, into two parts: the first con­tained the cells for gen­er­at­ing elec­tric­ity, the sec­ond that mech­a­nism trans­mit­ting move­ment to the pro­pel­ler.</p>
				<p>Right off, I de­tected an odor per­me­at­ing the com­part­ment that was <i lang="la" xml:lang="la">sui generis</i><a class="epub-type-noteref" href="../text/endnotes.xhtml#note-8" id="note-8" epub:type="noteref">8</a>. Cap­tain Nemo no­ticed the neg­a­tive im­pres­sion it made on me.</p>
				<p>“That,” he told me, “is a gaseous dis­charge caused by our use of sodium, but it’s only a mild in­con­ve­nience. In any event, ev­ery morn­ing we san­i­tize the ship by ven­ti­lat­ing it in the open air.”</p>
				<p>Mean­while I ex­am­ined the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i>’s en­gine with a fas­ci­na­tion easy to imag­ine.</p>
				<p>“You ob­serve,” Cap­tain Nemo told me, “that I use Bun­sen cells, not Ruhmko­rff cells. The lat­ter would be in­ef­fec­tual. One uses fewer Bun­sen cells, but they’re big and strong, and ex­pe­ri­ence has proven their su­pe­ri­or­ity. The elec­tric­ity gen­er­ated here makes its way to the stern, where elec­tro­mag­nets of huge size ac­ti­vate a spe­cial sys­tem of levers and gears that trans­mit move­ment to the pro­pel­ler’s shaft. The lat­ter has a di­am­e­ter of 6 me­ters, a pitch of 7.5 me­ters, and can do up to 120 rev­o­lu­tions per minute.”</p>
				<p>“And that gives you?”</p>
				<p>“A speed of fifty miles per hour.”</p>
				<p>There lay a mys­tery, but I didn’t in­sist on ex­plor­ing it. How could elec­tric­ity work with such power? Where did this nearly un­lim­ited en­ergy orig­i­nate? Was it in the ex­tra­or­di­nary volt­age ob­tained from some new kind of in­duc­tion coil? Could its trans­mis­sion have been im­mea­sur­ably in­creased by some un­known sys­tem of levers?<a class="epub-type-noteref" href="../text/endnotes.xhtml#note-9" id="note-9" epub:type="noteref">9</a> This was the point I couldn’t grasp.</p>
				<p>“Cap­tain Nemo,” I said, “I’ll vouch for the re­sults and not try to ex­plain them. I’ve seen the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i> at work out in front of the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Abra­ham Lin­coln</i>, and I know where I stand on its speed. But it isn’t enough just to move, we have to see where we’re go­ing! We must be able to steer right or left, up or down! How do you reach the lower depths, where you meet an in­creas­ing re­sis­tance that’s as­sessed in hun­dreds of at­mos­pheres? How do you rise back to the sur­face of the ocean? Fi­nally, how do you keep your ship at what­ever level suits you? Am I in­dis­creet in ask­ing you all these things?”</p>
				<p>“Not at all, pro­fes­sor,” the cap­tain an­swered me af­ter a slight hes­i­ta­tion, “since you’ll never leave this un­der­wa­ter boat. Come into the lounge. It’s ac­tu­ally our work room, and there you’ll learn the full story about the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i>!”</p>
			</section>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
