<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="en-US" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: http://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Chapter 3</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="part-1" epub:type="part">
			<section id="chapter-1-3" epub:type="chapter">
				<h3 epub:type="title">
					<span epub:type="z3998:roman">III</span>
					<span class="epub-type-subtitle" epub:type="subtitle">As Master Wishes</span>
				</h3>
				<p>Three sec­onds be­fore the ar­rival of <span class="name">J. B.</span> Hob­son’s let­ter, I no more dreamed of chas­ing the uni­corn than of try­ing for the North­west Pas­sage. Three sec­onds af­ter read­ing this let­ter from the hon­or­able Sec­re­tary of the Navy, I un­der­stood at last that my true vo­ca­tion, my sole pur­pose in life, was to hunt down this dis­turb­ing mon­ster and rid the world of it.</p>
				<p>Even so, I had just re­turned from an ar­du­ous jour­ney, ex­hausted and badly need­ing a rest. I wanted noth­ing more than to see my coun­try again, my friends, my mod­est quar­ters by the Botan­i­cal Gar­dens, my dearly beloved col­lec­tions! But now noth­ing could hold me back. I for­got ev­ery­thing else, and with­out an­other thought of ex­haus­tion, friends, or col­lec­tions, I ac­cepted the Amer­i­can gov­ern­ment’s of­fer.</p>
				<p>“Be­sides,” I mused, “all roads lead home to Europe, and our uni­corn may be gra­cious enough to take me to­ward the coast of France! That fine an­i­mal may even let it­self be cap­tured in Euro­pean seas—as a per­sonal fa­vor to me—and I’ll bring back to the Mu­seum of Nat­u­ral His­tory at least half a me­ter of its ivory lance!”</p>
				<p>But in the mean­time I would have to look for this nar­whale in the north­ern Pa­cific Ocean; which meant re­turn­ing to France by way of the An­tipodes.</p>
				<p>“Con­seil!” I called in an im­pa­tient voice.</p>
				<p>Con­seil was my manser­vant. A de­voted lad who went with me on all my jour­neys; a gal­lant Flem­ish boy whom I gen­uinely liked and who re­turned the com­pli­ment; a born stoic, punc­til­ious on prin­ci­ple, ha­bit­u­ally hard­work­ing, rarely star­tled by life’s sur­prises, very skill­ful with his hands, ef­fi­cient in his ev­ery duty, and de­spite his hav­ing a name that means “coun­sel,” never giv­ing ad­vice—not even the un­so­licited kind!</p>
				<p>From rub­bing shoul­ders with sci­en­tists in our lit­tle uni­verse by the Botan­i­cal Gar­dens, the boy had come to know a thing or two. In Con­seil I had a sea­soned spe­cial­ist in bi­o­log­i­cal clas­si­fi­ca­tion, an en­thu­si­ast who could run with ac­ro­batic agility up and down the whole lad­der of branches, groups, classes, sub­classes, or­ders, fam­i­lies, gen­era, sub­gen­era, species, and va­ri­eties. But there his sci­ence came to a halt. Clas­si­fy­ing was ev­ery­thing to him, so he knew noth­ing else. Well versed in the the­ory of clas­si­fi­ca­tion, he was poorly versed in its prac­ti­cal ap­pli­ca­tion, and I doubt that he could tell a sperm whale from a baleen whale! And yet, what a fine, gal­lant lad!</p>
				<p>For the past ten years, Con­seil had gone with me wher­ever sci­ence beck­oned. Not once did he com­ment on the length or the hard­ships of a jour­ney. Never did he ob­ject to buck­ling up his suit­case for any coun­try what­ever, China or the Congo, no mat­ter how far off it was. He went here, there, and ev­ery­where in per­fect con­tent­ment. More­over, he en­joyed ex­cel­lent health that de­fied all ail­ments, owned solid mus­cles, but hadn’t a nerve in him, not a sign of nerves—the men­tal type, I mean.</p>
				<p>The lad was thirty years old, and his age to that of his em­ployer was as fif­teen is to twenty. Please for­give me for this un­der­handed way of ad­mit­ting I had turned forty.</p>
				<p>But Con­seil had one flaw. He was a fa­natic on for­mal­ity, and he only ad­dressed me in the third per­son—to the point where it got tire­some.</p>
				<p>“Con­seil!” I re­peated, while fever­ishly be­gin­ning my prepa­ra­tions for de­par­ture.</p>
				<p>To be sure, I had con­fi­dence in this de­voted lad. Or­di­nar­ily, I never asked whether or not it suited him to go with me on my jour­neys; but this time an ex­pe­di­tion was at is­sue that could drag on in­def­i­nitely, a haz­ardous un­der­tak­ing whose pur­pose was to hunt an an­i­mal that could sink a frigate as eas­ily as a wal­nut shell! There was good rea­son to stop and think, even for the world’s most emo­tion­less man. What would Con­seil say?</p>
				<p>“Con­seil!” I called a third time.</p>
				<p>Con­seil ap­peared.</p>
				<p>“Did mas­ter sum­mon me?” he said, en­ter­ing.</p>
				<p>“Yes, my boy. Get my things ready, get yours ready. We’re de­part­ing in two hours.”</p>
				<p>“As mas­ter wishes,” Con­seil replied serenely.</p>
				<p>“We haven’t a mo­ment to lose. Pack as much into my trunk as you can, my trav­el­ing kit, my suits, shirts, and socks, don’t bother count­ing, just squeeze it all in—and hurry!”</p>
				<p>“What about mas­ter’s col­lec­tions?” Con­seil ven­tured to ob­serve.</p>
				<p>“We’ll deal with them later.”</p>
				<p>“What! The <i epub:type="z3998:taxonomy">ar­chaeotherium</i>, <i epub:type="z3998:taxonomy">hyra­cotherium</i>, <i epub:type="z3998:taxonomy">ore­odonts</i>, <i epub:type="z3998:taxonomy">cheiropota­mus</i>, and mas­ter’s other fos­sil skele­tons?”</p>
				<p>“The ho­tel will keep them for us.”</p>
				<p>“What about mas­ter’s live <i epub:type="z3998:taxonomy">babirusa</i>?”</p>
				<p>“They’ll feed it dur­ing our ab­sence. Any­how, we’ll leave in­struc­tions to ship the whole menagerie to France.”</p>
				<p>“Then we aren’t re­turn­ing to Paris?” Con­seil asked.</p>
				<p>“Yes, we are … cer­tainly …” I replied eva­sively, “but af­ter we make a de­tour.”</p>
				<p>“What­ever de­tour mas­ter wishes.”</p>
				<p>“Oh, it’s noth­ing re­ally! A route slightly less di­rect, that’s all. We’re leav­ing on the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Abra­ham Lin­coln</i>.”</p>
				<p>“As mas­ter thinks best,” Con­seil replied placidly.</p>
				<p>“You see, my friend, it’s an is­sue of the mon­ster, the no­to­ri­ous nar­whale. We’re go­ing to rid the seas of it! The au­thor of a two-vol­ume work, in quarto, on the Mys­ter­ies of the Great Ocean Depths has no ex­cuse for not set­ting sail with Com­man­der Far­ragut. It’s a glo­ri­ous mis­sion but also a dan­ger­ous one! We don’t know where it will take us! Th­ese beasts can be quite un­pre­dictable! But we’re go­ing just the same! We have a com­man­der who’s game for any­thing!”</p>
				<p>“What mas­ter does, I’ll do,” Con­seil replied.</p>
				<p>“But think it over, be­cause I don’t want to hide any­thing from you. This is one of those voy­ages from which peo­ple don’t al­ways come back!”</p>
				<p>“As mas­ter wishes.”</p>
				<p>A quar­ter of an hour later, our trunks were ready. Con­seil did them in a flash, and I was sure the lad hadn’t missed a thing, be­cause he clas­si­fied shirts and suits as ex­pertly as birds and mam­mals.</p>
				<p>The ho­tel el­e­va­tor dropped us off in the main vestibule on the mez­za­nine. I went down a short stair lead­ing to the ground floor. I set­tled my bill at that huge counter that was al­ways un­der siege by a con­sid­er­able crowd. I left in­struc­tions for ship­ping my con­tain­ers of stuffed an­i­mals and dried plants to Paris, France. I opened a line of credit suf­fi­cient to cover the <i epub:type="z3998:taxonomy">babirusa</i> and, Con­seil at my heels, I jumped into a car­riage.</p>
				<p>For a fare of twenty francs, the ve­hi­cle went down Broad­way to Union Square, took Fourth Ave. to its junc­tion with Bow­ery St., turned into Ka­trin St. and halted at Pier 34. There the Ka­trin ferry trans­ferred men, horses, and car­riage to Brook­lyn, that great New York an­nex lo­cated on the left bank of the East River, and in a few min­utes we ar­rived at the wharf next to which the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Abra­ham Lin­coln</i> was vom­it­ing tor­rents of black smoke from its two fun­nels.</p>
				<p>Our bag­gage was im­me­di­ately car­ried to the deck of the frigate. I rushed aboard. I asked for Com­man­der Far­ragut. One of the sailors led me to the af­ter­deck, where I stood in the pres­ence of a smart-look­ing of­fi­cer who ex­tended his hand to me.</p>
				<p>“Pro­fes­sor Pierre Aron­nax?” he said to me.</p>
				<p>“The same,” I replied. “Com­man­der Far­ragut?”</p>
				<p>“In per­son. Wel­come aboard, pro­fes­sor. Your cabin is wait­ing for you.”</p>
				<p>I bowed, and let­ting the com­man­der at­tend to get­ting un­der way, I was taken to the cabin that had been set aside for me.</p>
				<p>The <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Abra­ham Lin­coln</i> had been per­fectly cho­sen and fit­ted out for its new as­sign­ment. It was a high-speed frigate fur­nished with su­per­heat­ing equip­ment that al­lowed the ten­sion of its steam to build to seven at­mos­pheres. Un­der this pres­sure the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Abra­ham Lin­coln</i> reached an av­er­age speed of 18.3 miles per hour, a con­sid­er­able speed but still not enough to cope with our gi­gan­tic cetacean.</p>
				<p>The frigate’s in­te­rior ac­com­mo­da­tions com­ple­mented its nau­ti­cal virtues. I was well sat­is­fied with my cabin, which was lo­cated in the stern and opened into the of­fi­cers’ mess.</p>
				<p>“We’ll be quite com­fort­able here,” I told Con­seil.</p>
				<p>“With all due re­spect to mas­ter,” Con­seil replied, “as com­fort­able as a her­mit crab in­side the shell of a whelk.”</p>
				<p>I left Con­seil to the proper stow­ing of our lug­gage and climbed on deck to watch the prepa­ra­tions for get­ting un­der way.</p>
				<p>Just then Com­man­der Far­ragut was giv­ing or­ders to cast off the last moor­ings hold­ing the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Abra­ham Lin­coln</i> to its Brook­lyn pier. And so if I’d been de­layed by a quar­ter of an hour or even less, the frigate would have gone with­out me, and I would have missed out on this un­earthly, ex­tra­or­di­nary, and in­con­ceiv­able ex­pe­di­tion, whose true story might well meet with some skep­ti­cism.</p>
				<p>But Com­man­der Far­ragut didn’t want to waste a sin­gle day, or even a sin­gle hour, in mak­ing for those seas where the an­i­mal had just been sighted. He sum­moned his en­gi­neer.</p>
				<p>“Are we up to pres­sure?” he asked the man.</p>
				<p>“Aye, sir,” the en­gi­neer replied.</p>
				<p>“Go ahead, then!” Com­man­der Far­ragut called.</p>
				<p>At this or­der, which was re­layed to the en­gine by means of a com­pressed-air de­vice, the me­chan­ics ac­ti­vated the startup wheel. Steam rushed whistling into the gap­ing valves. Long hor­i­zon­tal pis­tons groaned and pushed the tie rods of the drive shaft. The blades of the pro­pel­ler churned the waves with in­creas­ing speed, and the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Abra­ham Lin­coln</i> moved out ma­jes­ti­cally amid a spec­ta­tor-laden es­cort of some 100 fer­ries and ten­ders.<a class="epub-type-noteref" href="../text/endnotes.xhtml#note-4" id="note-4" epub:type="noteref">4</a></p>
				<p>The wharves of Brook­lyn, and ev­ery part of New York bor­der­ing the East River, were crowded with cu­rios­ity seek­ers. Depart­ing from 500,000 throats, three cheers burst forth in suc­ces­sion. Thou­sands of hand­ker­chiefs were wav­ing above these tightly packed masses, hail­ing the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Abra­ham Lin­coln</i> un­til it reached the wa­ters of the Hud­son River, at the tip of the long penin­sula that forms New York City.</p>
				<p>The frigate then went along the New Jersey coast—the won­der­ful right bank of this river, all loaded down with coun­try homes—and passed by the forts to salutes from their big­gest can­nons. The <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Abra­ham Lin­coln</i> replied by three times low­er­ing and hoist­ing the Amer­i­can flag, whose thirty-nine stars gleamed from the gaff of the mizzen sail; then, chang­ing speed to take the buoy-marked chan­nel that curved into the in­ner bay formed by the spit of Sandy Hook, it hugged this sand-cov­ered strip of land where thou­sands of spec­ta­tors ac­claimed us one more time.</p>
				<p>The es­cort of boats and ten­ders still fol­lowed the frigate and only left us when we came abreast of the light­ship, whose two sig­nal lights mark the en­trance of the nar­rows to Up­per New York Bay.</p>
				<p>Three o’clock then sounded. The har­bor pi­lot went down into his dinghy and re­joined a lit­tle schooner wait­ing for him to lee­ward. The fur­naces were stoked; the pro­pel­ler churned the waves more swiftly; the frigate skirted the flat, yel­low coast of Long Is­land; and at eight o’clock in the evening, af­ter the lights of Fire Is­land had van­ished into the north­west, we ran at full steam onto the dark wa­ters of the At­lantic.</p>
			</section>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
