<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="en-US" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: http://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Chapter 5</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="part-1" epub:type="part">
			<section id="chapter-1-5" epub:type="chapter">
				<h3 epub:type="title">
					<span class="first-child" epub:type="z3998:roman">V</span>
					<span class="epub-type-subtitle" epub:type="subtitle">At Random!</span>
				</h3>
				<p>For some while the voy­age of the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Abra­ham Lin­coln</i> was marked by no in­ci­dent. But one cir­cum­stance arose that dis­played Ned Land’s mar­velous skills and showed just how much con­fi­dence we could place in him.</p>
				<p>Off the Falk­land Is­lands on June 30, the frigate came in con­tact with a fleet of Amer­i­can whalers, and we learned that they hadn’t seen the nar­whale. But one of them, the cap­tain of the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Mon­roe</i>, knew that Ned Land had shipped aboard the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Abra­ham Lin­coln</i> and asked his help in hunt­ing a baleen whale that was in sight. Anx­ious to see Ned Land at work, Com­man­der Far­ragut au­tho­rized him to make his way aboard the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Mon­roe</i>. And the Cana­dian had such good luck that with a right-and-left shot, he har­pooned not one whale but two, strik­ing the first straight to the heart and catch­ing the other af­ter a few min­utes’ chase!</p>
				<p>As­suredly, if the mon­ster ever had to deal with Ned Land’s har­poon, I wouldn’t bet on the mon­ster.</p>
				<p>The frigate sailed along the east coast of South Amer­ica with prodi­gious speed. By July 3 we were at the en­trance to the Strait of Mag­el­lan, abreast of Cabo de las Vir­genes. But Com­man­der Far­ragut was un­will­ing to at­tempt this tor­tu­ous pas­sage­way and ma­neu­vered in­stead to dou­ble Cape Horn.</p>
				<p>The crew sided with him unan­i­mously. In­deed, were we likely to en­counter the nar­whale in such a cramped strait? Many of our sailors swore that the mon­ster couldn’t ne­go­ti­ate this pas­sage­way sim­ply be­cause “he’s too big for it!”</p>
				<p>Near three o’clock in the af­ter­noon on July 6, fif­teen miles south of shore, the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Abra­ham Lin­coln</i> dou­bled that soli­tary islet at the tip of the South Amer­i­can con­ti­nent, that stray rock Dutch sea­men had named Cape Horn af­ter their home­town of Hoorn. Our course was set for the north­west, and the next day our frigate’s pro­pel­ler fi­nally churned the wa­ters of the Pa­cific.</p>
				<p>“Open your eyes! Open your eyes!” re­peated the sailors of the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Abra­ham Lin­coln</i>.</p>
				<p>And they opened amaz­ingly wide. Eyes and spy­glasses (a bit daz­zled, it is true, by the vista of $2,000) didn’t re­main at rest for an in­stant. Day and night we ob­served the sur­face of the ocean, and those with nyc­talopic eyes, whose abil­ity to see in the dark in­creased their chances by fifty per­cent, had an ex­cel­lent shot at win­ning the prize.</p>
				<p>As for me, I was hardly drawn by the lure of money and yet was far from the least at­ten­tive on board. Snatch­ing only a few min­utes for meals and a few hours for sleep, come rain or come shine, I no longer left the ship’s deck. Some­times bend­ing over the fore­cas­tle rail­ings, some­times lean­ing against the stern­rail, I ea­gerly scoured that cot­ton-col­ored wake that whitened the ocean as far as the eye could see! And how many times I shared the ex­cite­ment of gen­eral staff and crew when some un­pre­dictable whale lifted its black­ish back above the waves. In an in­stant the frigate’s deck would be­come densely pop­u­lated. The cowls over the com­pan­ion­ways would vomit a tor­rent of sailors and of­fi­cers. With pant­ing chests and anx­ious eyes, we each would ob­serve the cetacean’s move­ments. I stared; I stared un­til I nearly went blind from a worn-out retina, while Con­seil, as stoic as ever, kept re­peat­ing to me in a calm tone:</p>
				<p>“If mas­ter’s eyes would kindly stop bulging, mas­ter will see far­ther!”</p>
				<p>But what a waste of en­ergy! The <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Abra­ham Lin­coln</i> would change course and race af­ter the an­i­mal sighted, only to find an or­di­nary baleen whale or a com­mon sperm whale that soon dis­ap­peared amid a cho­rus of curses!</p>
				<p>How­ever, the weather held good. Our voy­age was pro­ceed­ing un­der the most fa­vor­able con­di­tions. By then it was the bad sea­son in these south­ern­most re­gions, be­cause July in this zone cor­re­sponds to our Jan­uary in Europe; but the sea re­mained smooth and eas­ily vis­i­ble over a vast perime­ter.</p>
				<p>Ned Land still kept up the most tena­cious skep­ti­cism; be­yond his spells on watch, he pre­tended that he never even looked at the sur­face of the waves, at least while no whales were in sight. And yet the mar­velous power of his vi­sion could have per­formed yeo­man ser­vice. But this stub­born Cana­dian spent eight hours out of ev­ery twelve read­ing or sleep­ing in his cabin. A hun­dred times I chided him for his un­con­cern.</p>
				<p>“Bah!” he replied. “Noth­ing’s out there, Pro­fes­sor Aron­nax, and if there is some an­i­mal, what chance would we have of spot­ting it? Can’t you see we’re just wan­der­ing around at ran­dom? Peo­ple say they’ve sighted this slip­pery beast again in the Pa­cific high seas—I’m truly will­ing to be­lieve it, but two months have al­ready gone by since then, and judg­ing by your nar­whale’s per­son­al­ity, it hates grow­ing moldy from hang­ing out too long in the same wa­ter­ways! It’s blessed with a ter­rific gift for get­ting around. Now, pro­fes­sor, you know even bet­ter than I that na­ture doesn’t vi­o­late good sense, and she wouldn’t give some nat­u­rally slow an­i­mal the abil­ity to move swiftly if it hadn’t a need to use that tal­ent. So if the beast does ex­ist, it’s al­ready long gone!”</p>
				<p>I had no re­ply to this. Ob­vi­ously we were just grop­ing blindly. But how else could we go about it? All the same, our chances were au­to­mat­i­cally pretty lim­ited. Yet ev­ery­one still felt con­fi­dent of suc­cess, and not a sailor on board would have bet against the nar­whale ap­pear­ing, and soon.</p>
				<p>On July 20 we cut the Tropic of Capri­corn at lon­gi­tude 105°, and by the 27th of the same month, we had cleared the equa­tor on the 110th merid­ian. Th­ese bear­ings de­ter­mined, the frigate took a more de­ci­sive west­ward head­ing and tack­led the seas of the cen­tral Pa­cific. Com­man­der Far­ragut felt, and with good rea­son, that it was best to stay in deep wa­ters and keep his dis­tance from con­ti­nents or is­lands, whose neigh­bor­hoods the an­i­mal al­ways seemed to avoid—“No doubt,” our bo­sun said, “be­cause there isn’t enough wa­ter for him!” So the frigate kept well out when pass­ing the Tuamotu, Mar­que­sas, and Hawai­ian Is­lands, then cut the Tropic of Cancer at lon­gi­tude 132° and headed for the seas of China.</p>
				<p>We were fi­nally in the area of the mon­ster’s lat­est an­tics! And in all hon­esty, ship­board con­di­tions be­came life-threat­en­ing. Hearts were pound­ing hideously, gear­ing up for fu­tures full of in­cur­able aneurysms. The en­tire crew suf­fered from a ner­vous ex­cite­ment that it’s be­yond me to de­scribe. No­body ate, no­body slept. Twenty times a day some er­ror in per­cep­tion, or the op­ti­cal il­lu­sions of some sailor perched in the crosstrees, would cause in­tol­er­a­ble an­guish, and this emo­tion, re­peated twenty times over, kept us in a state of ir­ri­tabil­ity so in­tense that a re­ac­tion was bound to fol­low.</p>
				<p>And this re­ac­tion wasn’t long in com­ing. For three months, dur­ing which each day seemed like a cen­tury, the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Abra­ham Lin­coln</i> plowed all the northerly seas of the Pa­cific, rac­ing af­ter whales sighted, abruptly veer­ing off course, swerv­ing sharply from one tack to an­other, stop­ping sud­denly, putting on steam and re­vers­ing en­gines in quick suc­ces­sion, at the risk of strip­ping its gears, and it didn’t leave a sin­gle point un­ex­plored from the beaches of Ja­pan to the coasts of Amer­ica. And we found noth­ing! Noth­ing ex­cept an im­mense­ness of de­serted waves! Noth­ing re­motely re­sem­bling a gi­gan­tic nar­whale, or an un­der­wa­ter islet, or a derelict ship­wreck, or a run­away reef, or any­thing the least bit un­earthly!</p>
				<p>So the re­ac­tion set in. At first, dis­cour­age­ment took hold of peo­ple’s minds, open­ing the door to dis­be­lief. A new feel­ing ap­peared on board, made up of three-tenths shame and seven-tenths fury. The crew called them­selves “out-and-out fools” for be­ing hood­winked by a fairy tale, then grew steadily more fu­ri­ous! The moun­tains of ar­gu­ments amassed over a year col­lapsed all at once, and each man now wanted only to catch up on his eat­ing and sleep­ing, to make up for the time he had so stupidly sac­ri­ficed.</p>
				<p>With typ­i­cal hu­man fick­le­ness, they jumped from one ex­treme to the other. Inevitably, the most en­thu­si­as­tic sup­port­ers of the un­der­tak­ing be­came its most en­er­getic op­po­nents. This re­ac­tion mounted up­ward from the bow­els of the ship, from the quar­ters of the bunker hands to the mess­room of the gen­eral staff; and for cer­tain, if it hadn’t been for Com­man­der Far­ragut’s char­ac­ter­is­tic stub­born­ness, the frigate would ul­ti­mately have put back to that cape in the south.</p>
				<p>But this fu­tile search couldn’t drag on much longer. The <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Abra­ham Lin­coln</i> had done ev­ery­thing it could to suc­ceed and had no rea­son to blame it­self. Never had the crew of an Amer­i­can naval craft shown more pa­tience and zeal; they weren’t re­spon­si­ble for this fail­ure; there was noth­ing to do but go home.</p>
				<p>A re­quest to this ef­fect was pre­sented to the com­man­der. The com­man­der stood his ground. His sailors couldn’t hide their dis­con­tent, and their work suf­fered be­cause of it. I’m un­will­ing to say that there was mutiny on board, but af­ter a rea­son­able pe­riod of in­tran­si­gence, Com­man­der Far­ragut, like Christo­pher Colum­bus be­fore him, asked for a grace pe­riod of just three days more. After this three-day de­lay, if the mon­ster hadn’t ap­peared, our helms­man would give three turns of the wheel, and the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Abra­ham Lin­coln</i> would chart a course to­ward Euro­pean seas.</p>
				<p>This prom­ise was given on Novem­ber 2. It had the im­me­di­ate ef­fect of re­viv­ing the crew’s fail­ing spir­its. The ocean was ob­served with re­newed care. Each man wanted one last look with which to sum up his ex­pe­ri­ence. Spy­glasses func­tioned with fever­ish en­ergy. A supreme chal­lenge had been is­sued to the gi­ant nar­whale, and the lat­ter had no ac­cept­able ex­cuse for ig­nor­ing this Sum­mons to Ap­pear!</p>
				<p>Two days passed. The <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Abra­ham Lin­coln</i> stayed at half steam. On the off-chance that the an­i­mal might be found in these wa­ter­ways, a thou­sand meth­ods were used to spark its in­ter­est or rouse it from its ap­a­thy. Enor­mous sides of ba­con were trailed in our wake, to the great sat­is­fac­tion, I must say, of as­sorted sharks. While the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Abra­ham Lin­coln</i> heaved to, its long­boats ra­di­ated in ev­ery di­rec­tion around it and didn’t leave a sin­gle point of the sea un­ex­plored. But the evening of Novem­ber 4 ar­rived with this un­der­wa­ter mys­tery still un­solved.</p>
				<p>At noon the next day, Novem­ber 5, the agreed-upon de­lay ex­pired. After a po­si­tion fix, true to his prom­ise, Com­man­der Far­ragut would have to set his course for the south­east and leave the northerly re­gions of the Pa­cific de­ci­sively be­hind.</p>
				<p>By then the frigate lay in lat­i­tude 31° 15′ north and lon­gi­tude 136° 42′ east. The shores of Ja­pan were less than 200 miles to our lee­ward. Night was com­ing on. Eight o’clock had just struck. Huge clouds cov­ered the moon’s disk, then in its first quar­ter. The sea un­du­lated placidly be­neath the frigate’s stem­post.</p>
				<p>Just then I was in the bow, lean­ing over the star­board rail. Con­seil, sta­tioned be­side me, stared straight ahead. Roost­ing in the shrouds, the crew ex­am­ined the hori­zon, which shrank and dark­ened lit­tle by lit­tle. Of­fi­cers were prob­ing the in­creas­ing gloom with their night glasses. Some­times the murky ocean sparkled be­neath moon­beams that darted be­tween the fringes of two clouds. Then all traces of light van­ished into the dark­ness.</p>
				<p>Ob­serv­ing Con­seil, I dis­cov­ered that, just barely, the gal­lant lad had fallen un­der the gen­eral in­flu­ence. At least so I thought. Per­haps his nerves were twitch­ing with cu­rios­ity for the first time in his­tory.</p>
				<p>“Come on, Con­seil!” I told him. “Here’s your last chance to pocket that $2,000!”</p>
				<p>“If mas­ter will per­mit my say­ing so,” Con­seil replied, “I never ex­pected to win that prize, and the Union gov­ern­ment could have promised $100,000 and been none the poorer.”</p>
				<p>“You’re right, Con­seil, it turned out to be a fool­ish busi­ness af­ter all, and we jumped into it too hastily. What a waste of time, what a fu­tile ex­pense of emo­tion! Six months ago we could have been back in France—”</p>
				<p>“In mas­ter’s lit­tle apart­ment,” Con­seil an­swered. “In mas­ter’s mu­seum! And by now I would have clas­si­fied mas­ter’s fos­sils. And mas­ter’s <i epub:type="z3998:taxonomy">babirusa</i> would be en­sconced in its cage at the zoo in the Botan­i­cal Gar­dens, and it would have at­tracted ev­ery cu­rios­ity seeker in town!”</p>
				<p>“Quite so, Con­seil, and what’s more, I imag­ine that peo­ple will soon be pok­ing fun at us!”</p>
				<p>“To be sure,” Con­seil replied serenely, “I do think they’ll have fun at mas­ter’s ex­pense. And must it be said … ?”</p>
				<p>“It must be said, Con­seil.”</p>
				<p>“Well then, it will serve mas­ter right!”</p>
				<p>“How true!”</p>
				<p>“When one has the honor of be­ing an ex­pert as mas­ter is, one mustn’t lay him­self open to—”</p>
				<p>Con­seil didn’t have time to com­plete the com­pli­ment. In the midst of the gen­eral si­lence, a voice be­came au­di­ble. It was Ned Land’s voice, and it shouted:</p>
				<p>“Ahoy! There’s the thing in ques­tion, abreast of us to lee­ward!”</p>
			</section>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
