<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="en-US" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: http://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Chapter 7</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="part-1" epub:type="part">
			<section id="chapter-1-7" epub:type="chapter">
				<h3 epub:type="title">
					<span class="first-child" epub:type="z3998:roman">VII</span>
					<span class="epub-type-subtitle" epub:type="subtitle">A Whale of Unknown Species</span>
				</h3>
				<p>Although I was star­tled by this un­ex­pected de­scent, I at least have a very clear rec­ol­lec­tion of my sen­sa­tions dur­ing it.</p>
				<p>At first I was dragged about twenty feet un­der. I’m a good swim­mer, with­out claim­ing to equal such other au­thors as By­ron and Edgar Al­lan Poe, who were mas­ter divers, and I didn’t lose my head on the way down. With two vig­or­ous kicks of the heel, I came back to the sur­face of the sea.</p>
				<p>My first con­cern was to look for the frigate. Had the crew seen me go over­board? Was the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Abra­ham Lin­coln</i> tack­ing about? Would Com­man­der Far­ragut put a long­boat to sea? Could I hope to be res­cued?</p>
				<p>The gloom was pro­found. I glimpsed a black mass dis­ap­pear­ing east­ward, where its run­ning lights were fad­ing out in the dis­tance. It was the frigate. I felt I was done for.</p>
				<p>“Help! Help!” I shouted, swim­ming des­per­ately to­ward the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Abra­ham Lin­coln</i>.</p>
				<p>My clothes were weigh­ing me down. The wa­ter glued them to my body, they were par­a­lyz­ing my move­ments. I was sink­ing! I was suf­fo­cat­ing … !</p>
				<p>“Help!”</p>
				<p>This was the last shout I gave. My mouth was fill­ing with wa­ter. I strug­gled against be­ing dragged into the depths. …</p>
				<p>Sud­denly my clothes were seized by en­er­getic hands, I felt my­self pulled abruptly back to the sur­face of the sea, and yes, I heard these words pro­nounced in my ear:</p>
				<p>“If mas­ter would oblige me by lean­ing on my shoul­der, mas­ter will swim with much greater ease.”</p>
				<p>With one hand I seized the arm of my loyal Con­seil.</p>
				<p>“You!” I said. “You!”</p>
				<p>“My­self,” Con­seil replied, “and at mas­ter’s com­mand.”</p>
				<p>“That col­li­sion threw you over­board along with me?”</p>
				<p>“Not at all. But be­ing in mas­ter’s em­ploy, I fol­lowed mas­ter.”</p>
				<p>The fine lad thought this only nat­u­ral!</p>
				<p>“What about the frigate?” I asked.</p>
				<p>“The frigate?” Con­seil replied, rolling over on his back. “I think mas­ter had best not de­pend on it to any great ex­tent!”</p>
				<p>“What are you say­ing?”</p>
				<p>“I’m say­ing that just as I jumped over­board, I heard the men at the helm shout, ‘Our pro­pel­ler and rud­der are smashed!’ ”</p>
				<p>“Smashed?”</p>
				<p>“Yes, smashed by the mon­ster’s tusk! I be­lieve it’s the sole in­jury the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Abra­ham Lin­coln</i> has sus­tained. But most in­con­ve­niently for us, the ship can no longer steer.”</p>
				<p>“Then we’re done for!”</p>
				<p>“Per­haps,” Con­seil replied serenely. “How­ever, we still have a few hours be­fore us, and in a few hours one can do a great many things!”</p>
				<p>Con­seil’s un­flap­pable com­po­sure cheered me up. I swam more vig­or­ously, but ham­pered by clothes that were as re­strict­ing as a cloak made of lead, I was man­ag­ing with only the great­est dif­fi­culty. Con­seil no­ticed as much.</p>
				<p>“Master will al­low me to make an in­ci­sion,” he said.</p>
				<p>And he slipped an open clasp knife un­der my clothes, slit­ting them from top to bot­tom with one swift stroke. Then he briskly un­dressed me while I swam for us both.</p>
				<p>I then did Con­seil the same fa­vor, and we con­tin­ued to “nav­i­gate” side by side.</p>
				<p>But our cir­cum­stances were no less dread­ful. Per­haps they hadn’t seen us go over­board; and even if they had, the frigate—be­ing un­done by its rud­der—couldn’t re­turn to lee­ward af­ter us. So we could count only on its long­boats.</p>
				<p>Con­seil had coolly rea­soned out this hy­poth­e­sis and laid his plans ac­cord­ingly. An amaz­ing char­ac­ter, this boy; in mi­do­cean, this stoic lad seemed right at home!</p>
				<p>So, hav­ing con­cluded that our sole chance for sal­va­tion lay in be­ing picked up by the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Abra­ham Lin­coln</i>’s long­boats, we had to take steps to wait for them as long as pos­si­ble. Con­se­quently, I de­cided to di­vide our en­er­gies so we wouldn’t both be worn out at the same time, and this was the ar­range­ment: while one of us lay on his back, stay­ing mo­tion­less with arms crossed and legs out­stretched, the other would swim and pro­pel his part­ner for­ward. This tow­ing role was to last no longer than ten min­utes, and by re­liev­ing each other in this way, we could stay afloat for hours, per­haps even un­til day­break.</p>
				<p>Slim chance, but hope springs eter­nal in the hu­man breast! Be­sides, there were two of us. Lastly, I can vouch—as im­prob­a­ble as it seems—that even if I had wanted to de­stroy all my il­lu­sions, even if I had been will­ing to “give in to de­spair,” I could not have done so!</p>
				<p>The cetacean had rammed our frigate at about eleven o’clock in the evening. I there­fore cal­cu­lated on eight hours of swim­ming un­til sun­rise. A stren­u­ous task, but fea­si­ble, thanks to our re­liev­ing each other. The sea was pretty smooth and barely tired us. Some­times I tried to peer through the dense gloom, which was bro­ken only by the phos­pho­res­cent flick­ers com­ing from our move­ments. I stared at the lu­mi­nous rip­ples break­ing over my hands, shim­mer­ing sheets spat­tered with blotches of bluish gray. It seemed as if we’d plunged into a pool of quick­sil­ver.</p>
				<p>Near one o’clock in the morn­ing, I was over­come with tremen­dous ex­haus­tion. My limbs stiff­ened in the grip of in­tense cramps. Con­seil had to keep me go­ing, and at­tend­ing to our self-preser­va­tion be­came his sole re­spon­si­bil­ity. I soon heard the poor lad gasp­ing; his breath­ing be­came shal­low and quick. I didn’t think he could stand such ex­er­tions for much longer.</p>
				<p>“Go on! Go on!” I told him.</p>
				<p>“Leave mas­ter be­hind?” he replied. “Never! I’ll drown be­fore he does!”</p>
				<p>Just then, past the fringes of a large cloud that the wind was driv­ing east­ward, the moon ap­peared. The sur­face of the sea glis­tened un­der its rays. That kindly light rekin­dled our strength. I held up my head again. My eyes darted to ev­ery point of the hori­zon. I spot­ted the frigate. It was five miles from us and formed no more than a dark, barely per­cep­ti­ble mass. But as for long­boats, not a one in sight!</p>
				<p>I tried to call out. What was the use at such a dis­tance! My swollen lips wouldn’t let a sin­gle sound through. Con­seil could still ar­tic­u­late a few words, and I heard him re­peat at in­ter­vals:</p>
				<p>“Help! Help!”</p>
				<p>Ceas­ing all move­ment for an in­stant, we lis­tened. And it may have been a ring­ing in my ear, from this or­gan fill­ing with im­peded blood, but it seemed to me that Con­seil’s shout had re­ceived an an­swer back.</p>
				<p>“Did you hear that?” I mut­tered.</p>
				<p>“Yes, yes!”</p>
				<p>And Con­seil hurled an­other des­per­ate plea into space.</p>
				<p>This time there could be no mis­take! A hu­man voice had an­swered us! Was it the voice of some poor devil left be­hind in mi­do­cean, some other vic­tim of that col­li­sion suf­fered by our ship? Or was it one of the frigate’s long­boats, hail­ing us out of the gloom?</p>
				<p>Con­seil made one fi­nal ef­fort, and brac­ing his hands on my shoul­ders, while I of­fered re­sis­tance with one supreme ex­er­tion, he raised him­self half out of the wa­ter, then fell back ex­hausted.</p>
				<p>“What did you see?”</p>
				<p>“I saw …” he mut­tered, “I saw … but we mustn’t talk … save our strength … !”</p>
				<p>What had he seen? Then, lord knows why, the thought of the mon­ster came into my head for the first time … ! But even so, that voice … ? Gone are the days when Jon­ahs took refuge in the bel­lies of whales!</p>
				<p>Nev­er­the­less, Con­seil kept tow­ing me. Some­times he looked up, stared straight ahead, and shouted a re­quest for di­rec­tions, which was an­swered by a voice that was get­ting closer and closer. I could barely hear it. I was at the end of my strength; my fin­gers gave out; my hands were no help to me; my mouth opened con­vul­sively, fill­ing with brine; its cold­ness ran through me; I raised my head one last time, then I col­lapsed. …</p>
				<p>Just then some­thing hard banged against me. I clung to it. Then I felt my­self be­ing pulled up­ward, back to the sur­face of the wa­ter; my chest caved in, and I fainted. …</p>
				<p>For cer­tain, I came to quickly, be­cause some­one was mas­sag­ing me so vig­or­ously it left fur­rows in my flesh. I half opened my eyes. …</p>
				<p>“Con­seil!” I mut­tered.</p>
				<p>“Did mas­ter ring for me?” Con­seil replied.</p>
				<p>Just then, in the last light of a moon set­tling on the hori­zon, I spot­ted a face that wasn’t Con­seil’s but which I rec­og­nized at once.</p>
				<p>“Ned!” I ex­claimed.</p>
				<p>“In per­son, sir, and still af­ter his prize!” the Cana­dian replied.</p>
				<p>“You were thrown over­board af­ter the frigate’s col­li­sion?”</p>
				<p>“Yes, pro­fes­sor, but I was luck­ier than you, and right away I was able to set foot on this float­ing islet.”</p>
				<p>“Islet?”</p>
				<p>“Or in other words, on our gi­gan­tic nar­whale.”</p>
				<p>“Ex­plain your­self, Ned.”</p>
				<p>“It’s just that I soon re­al­ized why my har­poon got blunted and couldn’t punc­ture its hide.”</p>
				<p>“Why, Ned, why?”</p>
				<p>“Be­cause, pro­fes­sor, this beast is made of boil­er­plate steel!”</p>
				<p>At this point in my story, I need to get a grip on my­self, re­con­struct ex­actly what I ex­pe­ri­enced, and make dou­bly sure of ev­ery­thing I write.</p>
				<p>The Cana­dian’s last words caused a sud­den up­heaval in my brain. I swiftly hoisted my­self to the sum­mit of this half-sub­merged crea­ture or ob­ject that was serv­ing as our refuge. I tested it with my foot. Ob­vi­ously it was some hard, im­pen­e­tra­ble sub­stance, not the soft mat­ter that makes up the bod­ies of our big ma­rine mam­mals.</p>
				<p>But this hard sub­stance could have been a bony cara­pace, like those that cov­ered some pre­his­toric an­i­mals, and I might have left it at that and clas­si­fied this mon­ster among such am­phibi­ous rep­tiles as tur­tles or al­li­ga­tors.</p>
				<p>Well, no. The black­ish back sup­port­ing me was smooth and pol­ished with no over­lap­ping scales. On im­pact, it gave off a metal­lic sonor­ity, and as in­cred­i­ble as this sounds, it seemed, I swear, to be made of riv­eted plates.</p>
				<p>No doubts were pos­si­ble! This an­i­mal, this mon­ster, this nat­u­ral phe­nom­e­non that had puz­zled the whole sci­en­tific world, that had mud­dled and mis­led the minds of sea­men in both hemi­spheres, was, there could be no es­cap­ing it, an even more as­ton­ish­ing phe­nom­e­non—a phe­nom­e­non made by the hand of man.</p>
				<p>Even if I had dis­cov­ered that some fab­u­lous, mytho­log­i­cal crea­ture re­ally ex­isted, it wouldn’t have given me such a ter­rific men­tal jolt. It’s easy enough to ac­cept that prodi­gious things can come from our Creator. But to find, all at once, right be­fore your eyes, that the im­pos­si­ble had been mys­te­ri­ously achieved by man him­self: this stag­gers the mind!</p>
				<p>But there was no ques­tion now. We were stretched out on the back of some kind of un­der­wa­ter boat that, as far as I could judge, boasted the shape of an im­mense steel fish. Ned Land had clear views on the is­sue. Con­seil and I could only line up be­hind him.</p>
				<p>“But then,” I said, “does this con­trap­tion con­tain some sort of lo­co­mo­tive mech­a­nism, and a crew to run it?”</p>
				<p>“Ap­par­ently,” the har­pooner replied. “And yet for the three hours I’ve lived on this float­ing is­land, it hasn’t shown a sign of life.”</p>
				<p>“This boat hasn’t moved at all?”</p>
				<p>“No, Pro­fes­sor Aron­nax. It just rides with the waves, but oth­er­wise it hasn’t stirred.”</p>
				<p>“But we know that it’s cer­tainly gifted with great speed. Now then, since an en­gine is needed to gen­er­ate that speed, and a me­chanic to run that en­gine, I con­clude: we’re saved.”</p>
				<p>“Humph!” Ned Land put in, his tone de­not­ing reser­va­tions.</p>
				<p>Just then, as if to take my side in the ar­gu­ment, a bub­bling be­gan astern of this strange sub­mersible—whose drive mech­a­nism was ob­vi­ously a pro­pel­ler—and the boat started to move. We barely had time to hang on to its top­side, which emerged about eighty cen­time­ters above wa­ter. For­tu­nately its speed was not ex­ces­sive.</p>
				<p>“So long as it nav­i­gates hor­i­zon­tally,” Ned Land mut­tered, “I’ve no com­plaints. But if it gets the urge to dive, I wouldn’t give two dol­lars for my hide!”</p>
				<p>The Cana­dian might have quoted a much lower price. So it was im­per­a­tive to make con­tact with what­ever be­ings were con­fined in­side the plat­ing of this ma­chine. I searched its sur­face for an open­ing or a hatch, a “man­hole,” to use the of­fi­cial term; but the lines of riv­ets had been firmly driven into the sheet-iron joins and were straight and uni­form.</p>
				<p>More­over, the moon then dis­ap­peared and left us in pro­found dark­ness. We had to wait for day­light to find some way of get­ting in­side this un­der­wa­ter boat.</p>
				<p>So our sal­va­tion lay to­tally in the hands of the mys­te­ri­ous helms­men steer­ing this sub­mersible, and if it made a dive, we were done for! But aside from this oc­cur­ring, I didn’t doubt the pos­si­bil­ity of our mak­ing con­tact with them. In fact, if they didn’t pro­duce their own air, they in­evitably had to make pe­ri­odic vis­its to the sur­face of the ocean to re­plen­ish their oxy­gen sup­ply. Hence the need for some open­ing that put the boat’s in­te­rior in con­tact with the at­mos­phere.</p>
				<p>As for any hope of be­ing res­cued by Com­man­der Far­ragut, that had to be re­nounced com­pletely. We were be­ing swept west­ward, and I es­ti­mate that our com­par­a­tively mod­er­ate speed reached twelve miles per hour. The pro­pel­ler churned the waves with math­e­mat­i­cal reg­u­lar­ity, some­times emerg­ing above the sur­face and throw­ing phos­pho­res­cent spray to great heights.</p>
				<p>Near four o’clock in the morn­ing, the sub­mersible picked up speed. We could barely cope with this dizzy­ing rush, and the waves bat­tered us at close range. For­tu­nately Ned’s hands came across a big moor­ing ring fas­tened to the top­side of this sheet-iron back, and we all held on for dear life.</p>
				<p>Fi­nally this long night was over. My im­per­fect mem­o­ries won’t let me re­call my ev­ery im­pres­sion of it. A sin­gle de­tail comes back to me. Sev­eral times, dur­ing var­i­ous lulls of wind and sea, I thought I heard in­dis­tinct sounds, a sort of elu­sive har­mony pro­duced by dis­tant mu­si­cal chords. What was the se­cret be­hind this un­der­wa­ter nav­i­gat­ing, whose ex­pla­na­tion the whole world had sought in vain? What be­ings lived in­side this strange boat? What me­chan­i­cal force al­lowed it to move about with such prodi­gious speed?</p>
				<p>Day­light ap­peared. The morn­ing mists sur­rounded us, but they soon broke up. I was about to pro­ceed with a care­ful ex­am­i­na­tion of the hull, whose top­side formed a sort of hor­i­zon­tal plat­form, when I felt it sink­ing lit­tle by lit­tle.</p>
				<p>“Oh, damna­tion!” Ned Land shouted, stamp­ing his foot on the res­o­nant sheet iron. “Open up there, you an­ti­so­cial nav­i­ga­tors!”</p>
				<p>But it was dif­fi­cult to make your­self heard above the deaf­en­ing beats of the pro­pel­ler. For­tu­nately this sub­merg­ing move­ment stopped.</p>
				<p>From in­side the boat, there sud­denly came noises of iron fas­ten­ings pushed roughly aside. One of the steel plates flew up, a man ap­peared, gave a bizarre yell, and in­stantly dis­ap­peared.</p>
				<p>A few mo­ments later, eight strap­ping fel­lows ap­peared silently, their faces like masks, and dragged us down into their fear­some ma­chine.</p>
			</section>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
