<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="en-US" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: http://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Chapter 22</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="part-1" epub:type="part">
			<section id="chapter-1-22" epub:type="chapter">
				<h3 epub:type="title">
					<span class="first-child" epub:type="z3998:roman">XXII</span>
					<span class="epub-type-subtitle" epub:type="subtitle">The Lightning Bolts of Captain Nemo</span>
				</h3>
				<p>Without stand­ing up, we stared in the di­rec­tion of the for­est, my hand stop­ping half­way to my mouth, Ned Land’s com­plet­ing its as­sign­ment.</p>
				<p>“Stones don’t fall from the sky,” Con­seil said, “or else they de­serve to be called me­te­orites.”</p>
				<p>A sec­ond well-pol­ished stone re­moved a tasty ring­dove leg from Con­seil’s hand, giv­ing still greater rel­e­vance to his ob­ser­va­tion.</p>
				<p>We all three stood up, ri­fles to our shoul­ders, ready to an­swer any at­tack.</p>
				<p>“Apes maybe?” Ned Land ex­claimed.</p>
				<p>“Nearly,” Con­seil replied. “Sav­ages.”</p>
				<p>“Head for the skiff!” I said, mov­ing to­ward the sea.</p>
				<p>In­deed, it was es­sen­tial to beat a re­treat be­cause some twenty na­tives, armed with bows and slings, ap­peared barely a hun­dred paces off, on the out­skirts of a thicket that masked the hori­zon to our right.</p>
				<p>The skiff was aground ten fath­oms away from us.</p>
				<p>The sav­ages ap­proached with­out run­ning, but they fa­vored us with a show of the great­est hos­til­ity. It was rain­ing stones and ar­rows.</p>
				<p>Ned Land was un­will­ing to leave his pro­vi­sions be­hind, and de­spite the im­pend­ing dan­ger, he clutched his pig on one side, his kan­ga­roos on the other, and scam­pered off with re­spectable speed.</p>
				<p>In two min­utes we were on the strand. Load­ing pro­vi­sions and weapons into the skiff, push­ing it to sea, and po­si­tion­ing its two oars were the work of an in­stant. We hadn’t gone two ca­ble lengths when a hun­dred sav­ages, howl­ing and ges­tic­u­lat­ing, en­tered the wa­ter up to their waists. I looked to see if their ap­pear­ance might draw some of the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i>’s men onto the plat­form. But no. Ly­ing well out, that enor­mous ma­chine still seemed com­pletely de­serted.</p>
				<p>Twenty min­utes later we boarded ship. The hatches were open. After moor­ing the skiff, we reen­tered the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i>’s in­te­rior.</p>
				<p>I went be­low to the lounge, from which some chords were waft­ing. Cap­tain Nemo was there, lean­ing over the or­gan, deep in a mu­si­cal trance.</p>
				<p>“Cap­tain!” I said to him.</p>
				<p>He didn’t hear me.</p>
				<p>“Cap­tain!” I went on, touch­ing him with my hand.</p>
				<p>He trem­bled, and turn­ing around:</p>
				<p>“Ah, it’s you, pro­fes­sor!” he said to me. “Well, did you have a happy hunt? Was your herb gath­er­ing a suc­cess?”</p>
				<p>“Yes, cap­tain,” I replied, “but un­for­tu­nately we’ve brought back a horde of bipeds whose prox­im­ity wor­ries me.”</p>
				<p>“What sort of bipeds?”</p>
				<p>“Sav­ages.”</p>
				<p>“Sav­ages!” Cap­tain Nemo replied in an ironic tone. “You set foot on one of the shores of this globe, pro­fes­sor, and you’re sur­prised to find sav­ages there? Where aren’t there sav­ages? And be­sides, are they any worse than men else­where, these peo­ple you call sav­ages?”</p>
				<p>“But cap­tain—”</p>
				<p>“Speak­ing for my­self, sir, I’ve en­coun­tered them ev­ery­where.”</p>
				<p>“Well then,” I replied, “if you don’t want to wel­come them aboard the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i>, you’d bet­ter take some pre­cau­tions!”</p>
				<p>“Easy, pro­fes­sor, no cause for alarm.”</p>
				<p>“But there are a large num­ber of these na­tives.”</p>
				<p>“What’s your count?”</p>
				<p>“At least a hun­dred.”</p>
				<p>“Pro­fes­sor Aron­nax,” replied Cap­tain Nemo, whose fin­gers took their places again on the or­gan keys, “if ev­ery is­lander in Pa­pua were to gather on that beach, the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i> would still have noth­ing to fear from their at­tacks!”</p>
				<p>The cap­tain’s fin­gers then ran over the in­stru­ment’s key­board, and I no­ticed that he touched only its black keys, which gave his melodies a ba­si­cally Scot­tish color. Soon he had for­got­ten my pres­ence and was lost in a reverie that I no longer tried to dis­pel.</p>
				<p>I climbed onto the plat­form. Night had al­ready fallen, be­cause in this low lat­i­tude the sun sets quickly, with­out any twi­light. I could see Gue­boroa Is­land only dimly. But nu­mer­ous fires had been kin­dled on the beach, at­test­ing that the na­tives had no thoughts of leav­ing it.</p>
				<p>For sev­eral hours I was left to my­self, some­times mus­ing on the is­landers—but no longer fear­ing them be­cause the cap­tain’s un­flap­pable con­fi­dence had won me over—and some­times for­get­ting them to mar­vel at the splen­dors of this trop­i­cal night. My mem­o­ries took wing to­ward France, in the wake of those zo­di­a­cal stars due to twin­kle over it in a few hours. The moon shone in the midst of the con­stel­la­tions at their zenith. I then re­mem­bered that this loyal, good-na­tured satel­lite would re­turn to this same place the day af­ter to­mor­row, to raise the tide and tear the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i> from its coral bed. Near mid­night, see­ing that all was quiet over the dark­ened waves as well as un­der the wa­ter­side trees, I re­paired to my cabin and fell into a peace­ful sleep.</p>
				<p>The night passed with­out mishap. No doubt the Pa­puans had been fright­ened off by the mere sight of this mon­ster aground in the bay, be­cause our hatches stayed open, of­fer­ing easy ac­cess to the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i>’s in­te­rior.</p>
				<p>At six o’clock in the morn­ing, Jan­uary 8, I climbed onto the plat­form. The morn­ing shad­ows were lift­ing. The is­land was soon on view through the dis­solv­ing mists, first its beaches, then its sum­mits.</p>
				<p>The is­landers were still there, in greater num­bers than on the day be­fore, per­haps 500 or 600 of them. Tak­ing ad­van­tage of the low tide, some of them had moved for­ward over the heads of coral to within two ca­ble lengths of the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i>. I could eas­ily dis­tin­guish them. They ob­vi­ously were true Pa­puans, men of fine stock, ath­letic in build, fore­head high and broad, nose large but not flat, teeth white. Their woolly, red-tinted hair was in sharp con­trast to their bod­ies, which were black and glis­ten­ing like those of Nu­bians. Be­neath their pierced, dis­tended ear­lobes there dan­gled strings of beads made from bone. Gen­er­ally these sav­ages were naked. I noted some women among them, dressed from hip to knee in grass skirts held up by belts made of veg­e­ta­tion. Some of the chief­tains adorned their necks with cres­cents and with neck­laces made from beads of red and white glass. Armed with bows, ar­rows, and shields, nearly all of them car­ried from their shoul­ders a sort of net, which held those pol­ished stones their slings hurl with such dex­ter­ity.</p>
				<p>One of these chief­tains came fairly close to the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i>, ex­am­in­ing it with care. He must have been a <i lang="x-tribal" xml:lang="x-tribal">mado</i> of high rank, be­cause he pa­raded in a mat of ba­nana leaves that had ragged edges and was ac­cented with bright col­ors.</p>
				<p>I could eas­ily have picked off this is­lander, he stood at such close range; but I thought it best to wait for an ac­tual show of hos­til­ity. Between Euro­peans and sav­ages, it’s ac­cept­able for Euro­peans to shoot back but not to at­tack first.</p>
				<p>Dur­ing this whole time of low tide, the is­landers lurked near the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i>, but they weren’t bois­ter­ous. I of­ten heard them re­peat the word <i lang="x-tribal" xml:lang="x-tribal">as­sai</i>, and from their ges­tures I un­der­stood they were invit­ing me to go ashore, an in­vi­ta­tion I felt obliged to de­cline.</p>
				<p>So the skiff didn’t leave ship­side that day, much to the dis­plea­sure of Mr. Land who couldn’t com­plete his pro­vi­sions. The adroit Cana­dian spent his time pre­par­ing the meat and flour prod­ucts he had brought from Gue­boroa Is­land. As for the sav­ages, they went back to shore near eleven o’clock in the morn­ing, when the heads of coral be­gan to dis­ap­pear un­der the waves of the ris­ing tide. But I saw their num­bers swell con­sid­er­ably on the beach. It was likely that they had come from neigh­bor­ing is­lands or from the main­land of Pa­pua proper. How­ever, I didn’t see one lo­cal dugout ca­noe.</p>
				<p>Hav­ing noth­ing bet­ter to do, I de­cided to dredge these beau­ti­ful, clear wa­ters, which ex­hib­ited a pro­fu­sion of shells, zoophytes, and open-sea plants. Be­sides, it was the last day the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i> would spend in these wa­ter­ways, if, to­mor­row, it still floated off to the open sea as Cap­tain Nemo had promised.</p>
				<p>So I sum­moned Con­seil, who brought me a small, light drag­net sim­i­lar to those used in oys­ter fish­ing.</p>
				<p>“What about these sav­ages?” Con­seil asked me. “With all due re­spect to mas­ter, they don’t strike me as very wicked!”</p>
				<p>“They’re can­ni­bals even so, my boy.”</p>
				<p>“A per­son can be both a can­ni­bal and a de­cent man,” Con­seil replied, “just as a per­son can be both glut­tonous and hon­or­able. The one doesn’t ex­clude the other.”</p>
				<p>“Fine, Con­seil! And I agree that there are hon­or­able can­ni­bals who de­cently de­vour their pris­on­ers. How­ever, I’m op­posed to be­ing de­voured, even in all de­cency, so I’ll keep on my guard, es­pe­cially since the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i>’s com­man­der seems to be tak­ing no pre­cau­tions. And now let’s get to work!”</p>
				<p>For two hours our fish­ing pro­ceeded en­er­get­i­cally but with­out bring­ing up any rar­i­ties. Our drag­net was filled with Mi­das abalone, harp shells, obelisk snails, and es­pe­cially the finest ham­mer shells I had seen to that day. We also gath­ered in a few sea cu­cum­bers, some pearl oys­ters, and a dozen small tur­tles that we saved for the ship’s pantry.</p>
				<p>But just when I least ex­pected it, I laid my hands on a won­der, a nat­u­ral de­for­mity I’d have to call it, some­thing very sel­dom en­coun­tered. Con­seil had just made a cast of the drag­net, and his gear had come back up loaded with a va­ri­ety of fairly or­di­nary seashells, when sud­denly he saw me plunge my arms swiftly into the net, pull out a shelled an­i­mal, and give a con­cho­log­i­cal yell, in other words, the most pierc­ing yell a hu­man throat can pro­duce.</p>
				<p>“Eh? What hap­pened to mas­ter?” Con­seil asked, very star­tled. “Did mas­ter get bit­ten?”</p>
				<p>“No, my boy, but I’d gladly have sac­ri­ficed a fin­ger for such a find!”</p>
				<p>“What find?”</p>
				<p>“This shell,” I said, dis­play­ing the sub­ject of my tri­umph.</p>
				<p>“But that’s sim­ply an olive shell of the ‘tent olive’ species, genus <i epub:type="z3998:taxonomy">Oliva</i>, or­der <i epub:type="z3998:taxonomy">Pec­tini­branchia</i>, class <i epub:type="z3998:taxonomy">Gas­tropoda</i>, branch <i epub:type="z3998:taxonomy">Mol­lusca</i>—”</p>
				<p>“Yes, yes, Con­seil! But in­stead of coil­ing from right to left, this olive shell rolls from left to right!”</p>
				<p>“It can’t be!” Con­seil ex­claimed.</p>
				<p>“Yes, my boy, it’s a left-handed shell!”</p>
				<p>“A left-handed shell!” Con­seil re­peated, his heart pound­ing.</p>
				<p>“Look at its spi­ral!”</p>
				<p>“Oh, mas­ter can trust me on this,” Con­seil said, tak­ing the valu­able shell in trem­bling hands, “but never have I felt such ex­cite­ment!”</p>
				<p>And there was good rea­son to be ex­cited! In fact, as nat­u­ral­ists have ven­tured to ob­serve, “dex­tral­ity” is a well-known law of na­ture. In their ro­ta­tional and or­bital move­ments, stars and their satel­lites go from right to left. Man uses his right hand more of­ten than his left, and con­se­quently his var­i­ous in­stru­ments and equip­ment (stair­cases, locks, watch springs, etc.) are de­signed to be used in a right-to-left man­ner. Now then, na­ture has gen­er­ally obeyed this law in coil­ing her shells. They’re right-handed with only rare ex­cep­tions, and when by chance a shell’s spi­ral is left-handed, col­lec­tors will pay its weight in gold for it.</p>
				<p>So Con­seil and I were deep in the con­tem­pla­tion of our trea­sure, and I was solemnly promis­ing my­self to en­rich the Paris Mu­seum with it, when an ill-timed stone, hurled by one of the is­landers, whizzed over and shat­tered the valu­able ob­ject in Con­seil’s hands.</p>
				<p>I gave a yell of de­spair! Con­seil pounced on his ri­fle and aimed at a sav­age swing­ing a sling just ten me­ters away from him. I tried to stop him, but his shot went off and shat­tered a bracelet of amulets dan­gling from the is­lander’s arm.</p>
				<p>“Con­seil!” I shouted. “Con­seil!”</p>
				<p>“Eh? What? Didn’t mas­ter see that this man-eater ini­ti­ated the at­tack?”</p>
				<p>“A shell isn’t worth a hu­man life!” I told him.</p>
				<p>“Oh, the ras­cal!” Con­seil ex­claimed. “I’d rather he cracked my shoul­der!”</p>
				<p>Con­seil was in dead earnest, but I didn’t sub­scribe to his views. How­ever, the sit­u­a­tion had changed in only a short time and we hadn’t no­ticed. Now some twenty dugout ca­noes were sur­round­ing the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i>. Hol­lowed from tree trunks, these dugouts were long, nar­row, and well de­signed for speed, keep­ing their bal­ance by means of two bam­boo poles that floated on the sur­face of the wa­ter. They were ma­neu­vered by skill­ful, half-naked pad­dlers, and I viewed their ad­vance with def­i­nite alarm.</p>
				<p>It was ob­vi­ous these Pa­puans had al­ready en­tered into re­la­tions with Euro­peans and knew their ships. But this long, iron cylin­der ly­ing in the bay, with no masts or fun­nels—what were they to make of it? Noth­ing good, be­cause at first they kept it at a re­spect­ful dis­tance. How­ever, see­ing that it stayed mo­tion­less, they re­gained con­fi­dence lit­tle by lit­tle and tried to be­come more fa­mil­iar with it. Now then, it was pre­cisely this fa­mil­iar­ity that we needed to pre­vent. Since our weapons made no sound when they went off, they would have only a mod­er­ate ef­fect on these is­landers, who re­put­edly re­spect noth­ing but noisy mech­a­nisms. Without thun­der­claps, light­ning bolts would be much less fright­en­ing, al­though the dan­ger lies in the flash, not the noise.</p>
				<p>Just then the dugout ca­noes drew nearer to the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i>, and a cloud of ar­rows burst over us.</p>
				<p>“Fire and brim­stone, it’s hail­ing!” Con­seil said. “And poi­soned hail per­haps!”</p>
				<p>“We’ve got to alert Cap­tain Nemo,” I said, reen­ter­ing the hatch.</p>
				<p>I went be­low to the lounge. I found no one there. I ven­tured a knock at the door open­ing into the cap­tain’s state­room.</p>
				<p>The word “En­ter!” an­swered me. I did so and found Cap­tain Nemo busy with cal­cu­la­tions in which there was no short­age of <span class="algebra">x</span> and other al­ge­braic signs.</p>
				<p>“Am I dis­turb­ing you?” I said out of po­lite­ness.</p>
				<p>“Cor­rect, Pro­fes­sor Aron­nax,” the cap­tain an­swered me. “But I imag­ine you have press­ing rea­sons for look­ing me up?”</p>
				<p>“Very press­ing. Na­tive dugout ca­noes are sur­round­ing us, and in a few min­utes we’re sure to be as­saulted by sev­eral hun­dred sav­ages.”</p>
				<p>“Ah!” Cap­tain Nemo put in serenely. “They’ve come in their dugouts?”</p>
				<p>“Yes, sir.”</p>
				<p>“Well, sir, clos­ing the hatches should do the trick.”</p>
				<p>“Pre­cisely, and that’s what I came to tell you—”</p>
				<p>“Noth­ing eas­ier,” Cap­tain Nemo said.</p>
				<p>And he pressed an elec­tric but­ton, trans­mit­ting an or­der to the crew’s quar­ters.</p>
				<p>“There, sir, all un­der con­trol!” he told me af­ter a few mo­ments. “The skiff is in place and the hatches are closed. I don’t imag­ine you’re wor­ried that these gen­tle­men will stave in walls that shells from your frigate couldn’t breach?”</p>
				<p>“No, cap­tain, but one dan­ger still re­mains.”</p>
				<p>“What’s that, sir?”</p>
				<p>“To­mor­row at about this time, we’ll need to re­open the hatches to re­new the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i>’s air.”</p>
				<p>“No ar­gu­ment, sir, since our craft breathes in the man­ner fa­vored by cetaceans.”</p>
				<p>“But if these Pa­puans are oc­cu­py­ing the plat­form at that mo­ment, I don’t see how you can pre­vent them from en­ter­ing.”</p>
				<p>“Then, sir, you as­sume they’ll board the ship?”</p>
				<p>“I’m cer­tain of it.”</p>
				<p>“Well, sir, let them come aboard. I see no rea­son to pre­vent them. Deep down they’re just poor dev­ils, these Pa­puans, and I don’t want my visit to Gue­boroa Is­land to cost the life of a sin­gle one of these un­for­tu­nate peo­ple!”</p>
				<p>On this note I was about to with­draw; but Cap­tain Nemo de­tained me and in­vited me to take a seat next to him. He ques­tioned me with in­ter­est on our ex­cur­sions ashore and on our hunt­ing, but seemed not to un­der­stand the Cana­dian’s pas­sion­ate crav­ing for red meat. Then our con­ver­sa­tion skimmed var­i­ous sub­jects, and with­out be­ing more forth­com­ing, Cap­tain Nemo proved more af­fa­ble.</p>
				<p>Among other things, we came to talk of the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i>’s cir­cum­stances, aground in the same strait where Cap­tain Du­mont d’Urville had nearly mis­car­ried. Then, per­ti­nent to this:</p>
				<p>“He was one of your great sea­men,” the cap­tain told me, “one of your shrewdest nav­i­ga­tors, that d’Urville! He was the French­man’s Cap­tain Cook. A man wise but un­lucky! Brav­ing the ice banks of the South Pole, the coral of Ocea­nia, the can­ni­bals of the Pa­cific, only to per­ish wretch­edly in a train wreck! If that en­er­getic man was able to think about his life in its last sec­onds, imag­ine what his fi­nal thoughts must have been!”</p>
				<p>As he spoke, Cap­tain Nemo seemed deeply moved, an emo­tion I felt was to his credit.</p>
				<p>Then, chart in hand, we re­turned to the deeds of the French nav­i­ga­tor: his voy­ages to cir­cum­nav­i­gate the globe, his dou­ble at­tempt at the South Pole, which led to his dis­cov­ery of the Adélie Coast and the Louis-Philippe Penin­sula, fi­nally his hy­dro­graphic sur­veys of the chief is­lands in Ocea­nia.</p>
				<p>“What your d’Urville did on the sur­face of the sea,” Cap­tain Nemo told me, “I’ve done in the ocean’s in­te­rior, but more eas­ily, more com­pletely than he. Con­stantly tossed about by hur­ri­canes, the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Zeal­ous</i> and the new <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Astro­labe</i> couldn’t com­pare with the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i>, a quiet work room truly at rest in the midst of the wa­ters!”</p>
				<p>“Even so, cap­tain,” I said, “there is one ma­jor sim­i­lar­ity be­tween Du­mont d’Urville’s sloops of war and the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i>.”</p>
				<p>“What’s that, sir?”</p>
				<p>“Like them, the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i> has run aground!”</p>
				<p>“The <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i> is not aground, sir,” Cap­tain Nemo replied icily. “The <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i> was built to rest on the ocean floor, and I don’t need to un­der­take the ar­du­ous labors, the ma­neu­vers d’Urville had to at­tempt in or­der to float off his sloops of war. The <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Zeal­ous</i> and the new <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Astro­labe</i> well-nigh per­ished, but my <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i> is in no dan­ger. To­mor­row, on the day stated and at the hour stated, the tide will peace­fully lift it off, and it will re­sume its nav­i­gat­ing through the seas.”</p>
				<p>“Cap­tain,” I said, “I don’t doubt—”</p>
				<p>“To­mor­row,” Cap­tain Nemo added, stand­ing up, “to­mor­row at 2:40 in the af­ter­noon, the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i> will float off and exit the Tor­res Strait un­dam­aged.”</p>
				<p>Pro­nounc­ing these words in an ex­tremely sharp tone, Cap­tain Nemo gave me a curt bow. This was my dis­missal, and I reen­tered my state­room.</p>
				<p>There I found Con­seil, who wanted to know the up­shot of my in­ter­view with the cap­tain.</p>
				<p>“My boy,” I replied, “when I ex­pressed the be­lief that these Pa­puan na­tives were a threat to his <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i>, the cap­tain an­swered me with great irony. So I’ve just one thing to say to you: have faith in him and sleep in peace.”</p>
				<p>“Master has no need for my ser­vices?”</p>
				<p>“No, my friend. What’s Ned Land up to?”</p>
				<p>“Beg­ging mas­ter’s in­dul­gence,” Con­seil replied, “but our friend Ned is con­coct­ing a kan­ga­roo pie that will be the eighth won­der!”</p>
				<p>I was left to my­self; I went to bed but slept pretty poorly. I kept hear­ing noises from the sav­ages, who were stamp­ing on the plat­form and let­ting out deaf­en­ing yells. The night passed in this way, with­out the crew ever emerg­ing from their usual in­er­tia. They were no more dis­turbed by the pres­ence of these man-eaters than sol­diers in an ar­mored fortress are trou­bled by ants run­ning over the ar­mor plate.</p>
				<p>I got up at six o’clock in the morn­ing. The hatches weren’t open. So the air in­side hadn’t been re­newed; but the air tanks were kept full for any even­tu­al­ity and would func­tion ap­pro­pri­ately to shoot a few cu­bic me­ters of oxy­gen into the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i>’s thin at­mos­phere.</p>
				<p>I worked in my state­room un­til noon with­out see­ing Cap­tain Nemo even for an in­stant. No­body on board seemed to be mak­ing any prepa­ra­tions for de­par­ture.</p>
				<p>I still waited for a while, then I made my way to the main lounge. Its time­piece marked 2:30. In ten min­utes the tide would reach its max­i­mum el­e­va­tion, and if Cap­tain Nemo hadn’t made a rash prom­ise, the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i> would im­me­di­ately break free. If not, many months might pass be­fore it could leave its coral bed.</p>
				<p>But some pre­lim­i­nary vi­bra­tions could soon be felt over the boat’s hull. I heard its plat­ing grind against the lime­stone rough­ness of that coral base.</p>
				<p>At 2:35 Cap­tain Nemo ap­peared in the lounge.</p>
				<p>“We’re about to de­part,” he said.</p>
				<p>“Ah!” I put in.</p>
				<p>“I’ve given or­ders to open the hatches.”</p>
				<p>“What about the Pa­puans?”</p>
				<p>“What about them?” Cap­tain Nemo replied, with a light shrug of his shoul­ders.</p>
				<p>“Won’t they come in­side the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i>?”</p>
				<p>“How will they man­age that?”</p>
				<p>“By jump­ing down the hatches you’re about to open.”</p>
				<p>“Pro­fes­sor Aron­nax,” Cap­tain Nemo replied serenely, “the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i>’s hatches aren’t to be en­tered in that fash­ion even when they’re open.”</p>
				<p>I gaped at the cap­tain.</p>
				<p>“You don’t un­der­stand?” he said to me.</p>
				<p>“Not in the least.”</p>
				<p>“Well, come along and you’ll see!”</p>
				<p>I headed to the cen­tral com­pan­ion­way. There, very puz­zled, Ned Land and Con­seil watched the crew­men open­ing the hatches, while a fright­ful clamor and fu­ri­ous shouts re­sounded out­side.</p>
				<p>The hatch lids fell back onto the outer plat­ing. Twenty hor­ri­ble faces ap­peared. But when the first is­lander laid hands on the com­pan­ion­way rail­ing, he was flung back­ward by some in­vis­i­ble power, lord knows what! He ran off, howl­ing in ter­ror and wildly pranc­ing around.</p>
				<p>Ten of his com­pan­ions fol­lowed him. All ten met the same fate.</p>
				<p>Con­seil was in ec­stasy. Car­ried away by his vi­o­lent in­stincts, Ned Land leaped up the com­pan­ion­way. But as soon as his hands seized the rail­ing, he was thrown back­ward in his turn.</p>
				<p>“Dam­na­tion!” he ex­claimed. “I’ve been struck by a light­ning bolt!”</p>
				<p>Th­ese words ex­plained ev­ery­thing to me. It wasn’t just a rail­ing that led to the plat­form, it was a metal ca­ble fully charged with the ship’s elec­tric­ity. Any­one who touched it got a fear­some shock—and such a shock would have been fa­tal if Cap­tain Nemo had thrown the full cur­rent from his equip­ment into this con­duct­ing ca­ble! It could hon­estly be said that he had stretched be­tween him­self and his as­sailants a net­work of elec­tric­ity no one could clear with im­punity.</p>
				<p>Mean­while, crazed with ter­ror, the un­hinged Pa­puans beat a re­treat. As for us, half laugh­ing, we mas­saged and com­forted poor Ned Land, who was swear­ing like one pos­sessed.</p>
				<p>But just then, lifted off by the tide’s fi­nal un­du­la­tions, the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i> left its coral bed at ex­actly that for­ti­eth minute pin­pointed by the cap­tain. Its pro­pel­ler churned the waves with lazy majesty. Gather­ing speed lit­tle by lit­tle, the ship nav­i­gated on the sur­face of the ocean, and safe and sound, it left be­hind the dan­ger­ous nar­rows of the Tor­res Strait.</p>
			</section>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
