<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="en-US" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: http://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Chapter 18</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="part-1" epub:type="part">
			<section id="chapter-1-18" epub:type="chapter">
				<h3 epub:type="title">
					<span class="first-child" epub:type="z3998:roman">XVIII</span>
					<span class="epub-type-subtitle" epub:type="subtitle">Four Thousand Leagues Under the Pacific</span>
				</h3>
				<p>By the next morn­ing, Novem­ber 18, I was fully re­cov­ered from my ex­haus­tion of the day be­fore, and I climbed onto the plat­form just as the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i>’s chief of­fi­cer was pro­nounc­ing his daily phrase. It then oc­curred to me that these words ei­ther re­ferred to the state of the sea, or that they meant: “There’s noth­ing in sight.”</p>
				<p>And in truth, the ocean was de­serted. Not a sail on the hori­zon. The tips of Cre­spo Is­land had dis­ap­peared dur­ing the night. The sea, ab­sorb­ing ev­ery color of the prism ex­cept its blue rays, re­flected the lat­ter in ev­ery di­rec­tion and sported a won­der­ful in­digo tint. The un­du­lat­ing waves reg­u­larly took on the ap­pear­ance of wa­tered silk with wide stripes.</p>
				<p>I was mar­veling at this mag­nif­i­cent ocean view when Cap­tain Nemo ap­peared. He didn’t seem to no­tice my pres­ence and be­gan a se­ries of as­tro­nom­i­cal ob­ser­va­tions. Then, his op­er­a­tions fin­ished, he went and leaned his el­bows on the bea­con hous­ing, his eyes stray­ing over the sur­face of the ocean.</p>
				<p>Mean­while some twenty of the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i>’s sailors—all en­er­getic, well-built fel­lows—climbed onto the plat­form. They had come to pull up the nets left in our wake dur­ing the night. Th­ese sea­men ob­vi­ously be­longed to dif­fer­ent na­tion­al­i­ties, al­though in­di­ca­tions of Euro­pean phys­i­cal traits could be seen in them all. If I’m not mis­taken, I rec­og­nized some Ir­ish­men, some French­men, a few Slavs, and a na­tive of ei­ther Greece or Crete. Even so, these men were fru­gal of speech and used among them­selves only that bizarre di­alect whose ori­gin I couldn’t even guess. So I had to give up any no­tions of ques­tion­ing them.</p>
				<p>The nets were hauled on board. They were a breed of trawl re­sem­bling those used off the Nor­mandy coast, huge pouches held half open by a float­ing pole and a chain laced through the lower meshes. Trail­ing in this way from these iron glove mak­ers, the re­sult­ing re­cep­ta­cles scoured the ocean floor and col­lected ev­ery ma­rine ex­hibit in their path. That day they gath­ered up some un­usual spec­i­mens from these fish-filled wa­ter­ways: an­gler­fish whose com­i­cal move­ments qual­ify them for the ep­i­thet “clowns,” black Com­mer­son an­glers equipped with their an­ten­nas, un­du­lat­ing trig­ger­fish en­cir­cled by lit­tle red bands, bloated puffers whose venom is ex­tremely in­sid­i­ous, some olive-hued lam­preys, snipefish cov­ered with sil­ver scales, cut­lass fish whose elec­tro­cut­ing power equals that of the elec­tric eel and the elec­tric ray, scaly feath­erbacks with brown cross­wise bands, green­ish cod­fish, sev­eral va­ri­eties of goby, etc.; fi­nally, some fish of larger pro­por­tions: a one-me­ter jack with a prom­i­nent head, sev­eral fine bonito from the genus <i epub:type="z3998:taxonomy">Scomber</i> decked out in the col­ors blue and sil­ver, and three mag­nif­i­cent tuna whose high speeds couldn’t save them from our trawl.</p>
				<p>I es­ti­mate that this cast of the net brought in more than 1,000 pounds of fish. It was a fine catch but not sur­pris­ing. In essence, these nets stayed in our wake for sev­eral hours, in­car­cer­at­ing an en­tire aquatic world in pris­ons made of thread. So we were never lack­ing in pro­vi­sions of the high­est qual­ity, which the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i>’s speed and the al­lure of its elec­tric light could con­tin­u­ally re­plen­ish.</p>
				<p>Th­ese var­i­ous ex­hibits from the sea were im­me­di­ately low­ered down the hatch in the di­rec­tion of the stor­age lock­ers, some to be eaten fresh, oth­ers to be pre­served.</p>
				<p>After its fish­ing was fin­ished and its air sup­ply re­newed, I thought the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i> would re­sume its un­der­wa­ter ex­cur­sion, and I was get­ting ready to re­turn to my state­room, when Cap­tain Nemo turned to me and said with­out fur­ther pre­am­ble:</p>
				<p>“Look at this ocean, pro­fes­sor! Doesn’t it have the ac­tual gift of life? Doesn’t it ex­pe­ri­ence both anger and af­fec­tion? Last evening it went to sleep just as we did, and there it is, wak­ing up af­ter a peace­ful night!”</p>
				<p>No hel­los or good morn­ings for this gent! You would have thought this ec­cen­tric in­di­vid­ual was sim­ply con­tin­u­ing a con­ver­sa­tion we’d al­ready started!</p>
				<p>“See!” he went on. “It’s wak­ing up un­der the sun’s ca­resses! It’s go­ing to re­live its daily ex­is­tence! What a fas­ci­nat­ing field of study lies in watch­ing the play of its or­gan­ism. It owns a pulse and ar­ter­ies, it has spasms, and I side with the schol­arly Com­man­der Maury, who dis­cov­ered that it has a cir­cu­la­tion as real as the cir­cu­la­tion of blood in an­i­mals.”</p>
				<p>I’m sure that Cap­tain Nemo ex­pected no replies from me, and it seemed point­less to pitch in with “Ah yes,” “Ex­actly,” or “How right you are!” Rather, he was sim­ply talk­ing to him­self, with long pauses be­tween sen­tences. He was med­i­tat­ing out loud.</p>
				<p>“Yes,” he said, “the ocean owns a gen­uine cir­cu­la­tion, and to start it go­ing, the Creator of All Things has only to in­crease its heat, salt, and mi­cro­scopic an­i­mal life. In essence, heat cre­ates the dif­fer­ent den­si­ties that lead to cur­rents and coun­ter­cur­rents. Eva­po­ra­tion, which is nil in the High Arc­tic re­gions and very ac­tive in equa­to­rial zones, brings about a con­stant in­ter­change of trop­i­cal and po­lar wa­ters. What’s more, I’ve de­tected those fall­ing and ris­ing cur­rents that make up the ocean’s true breath­ing. I’ve seen a mol­e­cule of salt wa­ter heat up at the sur­face, sink into the depths, reach max­i­mum den­sity at −2° centi­grade, then cool off, grow lighter, and rise again. At the poles you’ll see the con­se­quences of this phe­nom­e­non, and through this law of farsee­ing na­ture, you’ll un­der­stand why wa­ter can freeze only at the sur­face!”</p>
				<p>As the cap­tain was fin­ish­ing his sen­tence, I said to my­self: “The pole! Is this brazen in­di­vid­ual claim­ing he’ll take us even to that lo­ca­tion?”</p>
				<p>Mean­while the cap­tain fell silent and stared at the el­e­ment he had stud­ied so thor­oughly and un­ceas­ingly. Then, go­ing on:</p>
				<p>“Salts,” he said, “fill the sea in con­sid­er­able quan­ti­ties, pro­fes­sor, and if you re­moved all its dis­solved saline con­tent, you’d cre­ate a mass mea­sur­ing 4,500,000 cu­bic leagues, which if it were spread all over the globe, would form a layer more than ten me­ters high. And don’t think that the pres­ence of these salts is due merely to some whim of na­ture. No. They make ocean wa­ter less open to evap­o­ra­tion and pre­vent winds from car­ry­ing off ex­ces­sive amounts of steam, which, when con­dens­ing, would sub­merge the tem­per­ate zones. Salts play a lead­ing role, the role of sta­bi­lizer for the gen­eral ecol­ogy of the globe!”</p>
				<p>Cap­tain Nemo stopped, straight­ened up, took a few steps along the plat­form, and re­turned to me:</p>
				<p>“As for those bil­lions of tiny an­i­mals,” he went on, “those in­fu­so­ria that live by the mil­lions in one droplet of wa­ter, 800,000 of which are needed to weigh one mil­ligram, their role is no less im­por­tant. They ab­sorb the ma­rine salts, they as­sim­i­late the solid el­e­ments in the wa­ter, and since they cre­ate coral and madrepores, they’re the true builders of lime­stone con­ti­nents! And so, af­ter they’ve fin­ished de­priv­ing our wa­ter drop of its min­eral nu­tri­ents, the droplet gets lighter, rises to the sur­face, there ab­sorbs more salts left be­hind through evap­o­ra­tion, gets heav­ier, sinks again, and brings those tiny an­i­mals new el­e­ments to ab­sorb. The out­come: a dou­ble cur­rent, ris­ing and fall­ing, con­stant move­ment, con­stant life! More in­tense than on land, more abun­dant, more in­fi­nite, such life blooms in ev­ery part of this ocean, an el­e­ment fa­tal to man, they say, but vi­tal to myr­i­ads of an­i­mals—and to me!”</p>
				<p>When Cap­tain Nemo spoke in this way, he was trans­fig­ured, and he filled me with ex­tra­or­di­nary ex­cite­ment.</p>
				<p>“There,” he added, “out there lies true ex­is­tence! And I can imag­ine the found­ing of nau­ti­cal towns, clus­ters of un­der­wa­ter house­holds that, like the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i>, would re­turn to the sur­face of the sea to breathe each morn­ing, free towns if ever there were, in­de­pen­dent cities! Then again, who knows whether some tyrant …”</p>
				<p>Cap­tain Nemo fin­ished his sen­tence with a ve­he­ment ges­ture. Then, ad­dress­ing me di­rectly, as if to drive away an ugly thought:</p>
				<p>“Pro­fes­sor Aron­nax,” he asked me, “do you know the depth of the ocean floor?”</p>
				<p>“At least, cap­tain, I know what the ma­jor sound­ings tell us.”</p>
				<p>“Could you quote them to me, so I can dou­ble-check them as the need arises?”</p>
				<p>“Here,” I replied, “are a few of them that stick in my mem­ory. If I’m not mis­taken, an av­er­age depth of 8,200 me­ters was found in the north At­lantic, and 2,500 me­ters in the Mediter­ranean. The most re­mark­able sound­ings were taken in the south At­lantic near the 35th par­al­lel, and they gave 12,000 me­ters, 14,091 me­ters, and 15,149 me­ters. All in all, it’s es­ti­mated that if the sea bot­tom were made level, its av­er­age depth would be about seven kilo­me­ters.”</p>
				<p>“Well, pro­fes­sor,” Cap­tain Nemo replied, “we’ll show you bet­ter than that, I hope. As for the av­er­age depth of this part of the Pa­cific, I’ll in­form you that it’s a mere 4,000 me­ters.”</p>
				<p>This said, Cap­tain Nemo headed to the hatch and dis­ap­peared down the lad­der. I fol­lowed him and went back to the main lounge. The pro­pel­ler was in­stantly set in mo­tion, and the log gave our speed as twenty miles per hour.</p>
				<p>Over the en­su­ing days and weeks, Cap­tain Nemo was very fru­gal with his vis­its. I saw him only at rare in­ter­vals. His chief of­fi­cer reg­u­larly fixed the po­si­tions I found re­ported on the chart, and in such a way that I could ex­actly plot the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i>’s course.</p>
				<p>Con­seil and Land spent the long hours with me. Con­seil had told his friend about the won­ders of our un­der­sea stroll, and the Cana­dian was sorry he hadn’t gone along. But I hoped an op­por­tu­nity would arise for a visit to the forests of Ocea­nia.</p>
				<p>Al­most ev­ery day the pan­els in the lounge were open for some hours, and our eyes never tired of prob­ing the mys­ter­ies of the un­der­wa­ter world.</p>
				<p>The <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i>’s gen­eral head­ing was south­east, and it stayed at a depth be­tween 100 and 150 me­ters. How­ever, from lord-knows-what whim, one day it did a di­ag­o­nal dive by means of its slant­ing fins, reach­ing strata lo­cated 2,000 me­ters un­der­wa­ter. The ther­mome­ter in­di­cated a tem­per­a­ture of 4.25° centi­grade, which at this depth seemed to be a tem­per­a­ture com­mon to all lat­i­tudes.</p>
				<p>On Novem­ber 26, at three o’clock in the morn­ing, the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i> cleared the Tropic of Cancer at lon­gi­tude 172°. On the 27th it passed in sight of the Hawai­ian Is­lands, where the fa­mous Cap­tain Cook met his death on Fe­bru­ary 14, 1779. By then we had fared 4,860 leagues from our start­ing point. When I ar­rived on the plat­form that morn­ing, I saw the Is­land of Hawaii two miles to lee­ward, the largest of the seven is­lands mak­ing up this group. I could clearly dis­tin­guish the tilled soil on its out­skirts, the var­i­ous moun­tain chains run­ning par­al­lel with its coast­line, and its vol­ca­noes, crowned by Mauna Kea, whose el­e­va­tion is 5,000 me­ters above sea level. Among other spec­i­mens from these wa­ter­ways, our nets brought up some pea­cock-tailed fla­bel­lar­ian coral, polyps flat­tened into stylish shapes and unique to this part of the ocean.</p>
				<p>The <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i> kept to its south­east­erly head­ing. On De­cem­ber 1 it cut the equa­tor at lon­gi­tude 142°, and on the 4th of the same month, af­ter a quick cross­ing marked by no in­ci­dent, we raised the Mar­que­sas Is­lands. Three miles off, in lat­i­tude 8° 57′ south and lon­gi­tude 139° 32′ west, I spot­ted Martin Point on Nuku Hiva, chief mem­ber of this is­land group that be­longs to France. I could make out only its wooded moun­tains on the hori­zon, be­cause Cap­tain Nemo hated to hug shore. There our nets brought up some fine fish sam­ples: dol­phin­fish with azure fins, gold tails, and flesh that’s un­ri­valed in the en­tire world, wrasse from the genus <i epub:type="z3998:taxonomy">Hol­o­gym­no­sus</i> that were nearly de­nuded of scales but ex­quis­ite in fla­vor, knife­jaws with bony beaks, yel­low­ish al­ba­core that were as tasty as bonito, all fish worth clas­si­fy­ing in the ship’s pantry.</p>
				<p>After leav­ing these de­light­ful is­lands to the pro­tec­tion of the French flag, the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i> cov­ered about 2,000 miles from De­cem­ber 4 to the 11th. Its nav­i­gat­ing was marked by an en­counter with an im­mense school of squid, un­usual mol­lusks that are near neigh­bors of the cut­tle­fish. French fish­er­men give them the name “cuck­old­fish,” and they be­long to the class <i epub:type="z3998:taxonomy">Cephalopoda</i>, fam­ily <i epub:type="z3998:taxonomy">Di­branchi­ata</i>, con­sist­ing of them­selves to­gether with cut­tle­fish and arg­onauts. The nat­u­ral­ists of an­tiq­uity made a spe­cial study of them, and these an­i­mals fur­nished many rib­ald fig­ures of speech for soap­box or­a­tors in the Greek mar­ket­place, as well as ex­cel­lent dishes for the ta­bles of rich cit­i­zens, if we’re to be­lieve Athenaeus, a Greek physi­cian pre­dat­ing Galen.</p>
				<p>It was dur­ing the night of De­cem­ber 9–10 that the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i> en­coun­tered this army of dis­tinctly noc­tur­nal mol­lusks. They num­bered in the mil­lions. They were mi­grat­ing from the tem­per­ate zones to­ward zones still warmer, fol­low­ing the itin­er­ar­ies of her­ring and sar­dines. We stared at them through our thick glass win­dows: they swam back­ward with tremen­dous speed, mov­ing by means of their lo­co­mo­tive tubes, chas­ing fish and mol­lusks, eat­ing the lit­tle ones, eaten by the big ones, and toss­ing in in­de­scrib­able con­fu­sion the ten feet that na­ture has rooted in their heads like a hair­piece of pneu­matic snakes. De­spite its speed, the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i> nav­i­gated for sev­eral hours in the midst of this school of an­i­mals, and its nets brought up an in­cal­cu­la­ble num­ber, among which I rec­og­nized all nine species that Pro­fes­sor Or­bigny has clas­si­fied as na­tive to the Pa­cific Ocean.</p>
				<p>Dur­ing this cross­ing, the sea con­tin­u­ally lav­ished us with the most mar­velous sights. Its va­ri­ety was in­fi­nite. It changed its set­ting and decor for the mere plea­sure of our eyes, and we were called upon not sim­ply to con­tem­plate the works of our Creator in the midst of the liq­uid el­e­ment, but also to probe the ocean’s most daunt­ing mys­ter­ies.</p>
				<p>Dur­ing the day of De­cem­ber 11, I was busy read­ing in the main lounge. Ned Land and Con­seil were ob­serv­ing the lu­mi­nous wa­ters through the gap­ing pan­els. The <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i> was mo­tion­less. Its bal­last tanks full, it was sit­ting at a depth of 1,000 me­ters in a com­par­a­tively un­pop­u­lated re­gion of the ocean where only larger fish put in oc­ca­sional ap­pear­ances.</p>
				<p>Just then I was study­ing a de­light­ful book by Jean Macé, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">The Ser­vants of the Stomach</i>, and sa­vor­ing its in­ge­nious teach­ings, when Con­seil in­ter­rupted my read­ing.</p>
				<p>“Would mas­ter kindly come here for an in­stant?” he said to me in an odd voice.</p>
				<p>“What is it, Con­seil?”</p>
				<p>“It’s some­thing that mas­ter should see.”</p>
				<p>I stood up, went, leaned on my el­bows be­fore the win­dow, and I saw it.</p>
				<p>In the broad elec­tric day­light, an enor­mous black mass, quite mo­tion­less, hung sus­pended in the midst of the wa­ters. I ob­served it care­fully, try­ing to find out the na­ture of this gi­gan­tic cetacean. Then a sud­den thought crossed my mind.</p>
				<p>“A ship!” I ex­claimed.</p>
				<p>“Yes,” the Cana­dian replied, “a dis­abled craft that’s sink­ing straight down!”</p>
				<p>Ned Land was not mis­taken. We were in the pres­ence of a ship whose sev­ered shrouds still hung from their clasps. Its hull looked in good con­di­tion, and it must have gone un­der only a few hours be­fore. The stumps of three masts, chopped off two feet above the deck, in­di­cated a flood­ing ship that had been forced to sac­ri­fice its mast­ing. But it had heeled side­ways, fill­ing com­pletely, and it was list­ing to port even yet. A sorry sight, this car­cass lost un­der the waves, but sor­rier still was the sight on its deck, where, lashed with ropes to pre­vent their be­ing washed over­board, some hu­man corpses still lay! I counted four of them—four men, one still stand­ing at the helm—then a woman, half­way out of a sky­light on the af­ter­deck, hold­ing a child in her arms. This woman was young. Un­der the bril­liant light­ing of the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i>’s rays, I could make out her fea­tures, which the wa­ter hadn’t yet de­com­posed. With a supreme ef­fort, she had lifted her child above her head, and the poor lit­tle crea­ture’s arms were still twined around its mother’s neck! The pos­tures of the four sea­men seemed ghastly to me, twisted from con­vul­sive move­ments, as if mak­ing a last ef­fort to break loose from the ropes that bound them to their ship. And the helms­man, stand­ing alone, calmer, his face smooth and se­ri­ous, his griz­zled hair plas­tered to his brow, his hands clutch­ing the wheel, seemed even yet to be guid­ing his wrecked three-mas­ter through the ocean depths!</p>
				<p>What a scene! We stood dumb­struck, hearts pound­ing, be­fore this ship­wreck caught in the act, as if it had been pho­tographed in its fi­nal mo­ments, so to speak! And al­ready I could see enor­mous sharks mov­ing in, eyes ablaze, drawn by the lure of hu­man flesh!</p>
				<p>Mean­while, turn­ing, the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i> made a cir­cle around the sink­ing ship, and for an in­stant I could read the board on its stern:</p>
				<blockquote class="inscription">
					<p class="first-child">The Florida</p>
					<p>Sun­der­land, Eng­land</p>
				</blockquote>
			</section>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
