<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="en-US" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: http://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Chapter 17</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="part-2" epub:type="part">
			<section id="chapter-2-17" epub:type="chapter">
				<h3 epub:type="title">
					<span class="first-child" epub:type="z3998:roman">XVII</span>
					<span class="epub-type-subtitle" epub:type="subtitle">From Cape Horn to the Amazon</span>
				</h3>
				<p>How I got onto the plat­form I’m un­able to say. Per­haps the Cana­dian trans­ferred me there. But I could breathe, I could in­hale the life-giv­ing sea air. Next to me my two com­pan­ions were get­ting tipsy on the fresh oxy­gen par­ti­cles. Poor souls who have suf­fered from long star­va­tion mustn’t pounce heed­lessly on the first food given them. We, on the other hand, didn’t have to prac­tice such mod­er­a­tion: we could suck the atoms from the air by the lung­ful, and it was the breeze, the breeze it­self, that poured into us this lux­u­ri­ous in­tox­i­ca­tion!</p>
				<p>“Ahhh!” Con­seil was putting in. “What fine oxy­gen! Let mas­ter have no fears about breath­ing. There’s enough for ev­ery­one.”</p>
				<p>As for Ned Land, he didn’t say a word, but his wide-open jaws would have scared off a shark. And what pow­er­ful in­hala­tions! The Cana­dian “drew” like a fur­nace go­ing full blast.</p>
				<p>Our strength re­turned promptly, and when I looked around, I saw that we were alone on the plat­form. No crew­men. Not even Cap­tain Nemo. Those strange sea­men on the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i> were con­tent with the oxy­gen cir­cu­lat­ing in­side. Not one of them had come up to en­joy the open air.</p>
				<p>The first words I pro­nounced were words of ap­pre­ci­a­tion and grat­i­tude to my two com­pan­ions. Ned and Con­seil had kept me alive dur­ing the fi­nal hours of our long death throes. But no ex­pres­sion of thanks could re­pay them fully for such de­vo­tion.</p>
				<p>“Good lord, pro­fes­sor,” Ned Land an­swered me, “don’t men­tion it! What did we do that’s so praise­wor­thy? Not a thing. It was a ques­tion of sim­ple arith­metic. Your life is worth more than ours. So we had to save it.”</p>
				<p>“No, Ned,” I replied, “it isn’t worth more. No­body could be bet­ter than a kind and gen­er­ous man like your­self!”</p>
				<p>“All right, all right!” the Cana­dian re­peated in em­bar­rass­ment.</p>
				<p>“And you, my gal­lant Con­seil, you suf­fered a great deal.”</p>
				<p>“Not too much, to be can­did with mas­ter. I was lack­ing a few throat­fuls of air, but I would have got­ten by. Be­sides, when I saw mas­ter faint­ing, it left me with­out the slight­est de­sire to breathe. It took my breath away, in a man­ner of …”</p>
				<p>Con­founded by this lapse into ba­nal­ity, Con­seil left his sen­tence hang­ing.</p>
				<p>“My friends,” I replied, very moved, “we’re bound to each other for­ever, and I’m deeply in­debted to you—”</p>
				<p>“Which I’ll take ad­van­tage of,” the Cana­dian shot back.</p>
				<p>“Eh?” Con­seil put in.</p>
				<p>“Yes,” Ned Land went on. “You can re­pay your debt by com­ing with me when I leave this in­fer­nal <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i>.”</p>
				<p>“By the way,” Con­seil said, “are we go­ing in a fa­vor­able di­rec­tion?”</p>
				<p>“Yes,” I replied, “be­cause we’re go­ing in the di­rec­tion of the sun, and here the sun is due north.”</p>
				<p>“Sure,” Ned Land went on, “but it re­mains to be seen whether we’ll make for the At­lantic or the Pa­cific, in other words, whether we’ll end up in well-trav­eled or de­serted seas.”</p>
				<p>I had no re­ply to this, and I feared that Cap­tain Nemo wouldn’t take us home­ward but rather into that huge ocean wash­ing the shores of both Asia and Amer­ica. In this way he would com­plete his un­der­wa­ter tour of the world, go­ing back to those seas where the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i> en­joyed the great­est free­dom. But if we re­turned to the Pa­cific, far from ev­ery pop­u­lated shore, what would hap­pen to Ned Land’s plans?</p>
				<p>We would soon set­tle this im­por­tant point. The <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i> trav­eled swiftly. Soon we had cleared the Antarc­tic Cir­cle plus the promon­tory of Cape Horn. We were abreast of the tip of South Amer­ica by March 31 at seven o’clock in the evening.</p>
				<p>By then all our past suf­fer­ings were for­got­ten. The mem­ory of that im­pris­on­ment un­der the ice faded from our minds. We had thoughts only of the fu­ture. Cap­tain Nemo no longer ap­peared, nei­ther in the lounge nor on the plat­form. The po­si­tions re­ported each day on the world map were put there by the chief of­fi­cer, and they en­abled me to de­ter­mine the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i>’s ex­act head­ing. Now then, that evening it be­came ob­vi­ous, much to my sat­is­fac­tion, that we were re­turn­ing north by the At­lantic route.</p>
				<p>I shared the re­sults of my ob­ser­va­tions with the Cana­dian and Con­seil.</p>
				<p>“That’s good news,” the Cana­dian replied, “but where’s the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i> go­ing?”</p>
				<p>“I’m un­able to say, Ned.”</p>
				<p>“After the South Pole, does our cap­tain want to tackle the North Pole, then go back to the Pa­cific by the no­to­ri­ous North­west Pas­sage?”</p>
				<p>“I wouldn’t dou­ble dare him,” Con­seil replied.</p>
				<p>“Oh well,” the Cana­dian said, “we’ll give him the slip long be­fore then.”</p>
				<p>“In any event,” Con­seil added, “he’s a su­per­man, that Cap­tain Nemo, and we’ll never re­gret hav­ing known him.”</p>
				<p>“Espe­cially once we’ve left him,” Ned Land shot back.</p>
				<p>The next day, April 1, when the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i> rose to the sur­face of the waves a few min­utes be­fore noon, we raised land to the west. It was Tierra del Fuego, the Land of Fire, a name given it by early nav­i­ga­tors af­ter they saw nu­mer­ous curls of smoke ris­ing from the na­tives’ huts. This Land of Fire forms a huge clus­ter of is­lands over thirty leagues long and eighty leagues wide, ex­tend­ing be­tween lat­i­tude 53° and 56° south, and be­tween lon­gi­tude 67° 50′ and 77° 15′ west. Its coast­line looked flat, but high moun­tains rose in the dis­tance. I even thought I glimpsed Mt. Sarmiento, whose el­e­va­tion is 2,070 me­ters above sea level: a pyra­mid-shaped block of shale with a very sharp sum­mit, which, de­pend­ing on whether it’s clear or veiled in va­por, “pre­dicts fair weather or foul,” as Ned Land told me.</p>
				<p>“A first-class barom­e­ter, my friend.”</p>
				<p>“Yes, sir, a nat­u­ral barom­e­ter that didn’t let me down when I nav­i­gated the nar­rows of the Strait of Mag­el­lan.”</p>
				<p>Just then its peak ap­peared be­fore us, stand­ing out dis­tinctly against the back­ground of the skies. This fore­cast fair weather. And so it proved.</p>
				<p>Go­ing back un­der the wa­ters, the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i> drew near the coast, cruis­ing along it for only a few miles. Through the lounge win­dows I could see long creep­ers and gi­gan­tic fu­cus plants, bulb-bear­ing sea­weed of which the open sea at the pole had re­vealed a few spec­i­mens; with their smooth, vis­cous fil­a­ments, they mea­sured as much as 300 me­ters long; gen­uine ca­bles more than an inch thick and very tough, they’re of­ten used as moor­ing lines for ships. Another weed, known by the name <i>velp</i> and boast­ing four-foot leaves, was crammed into the coral con­cre­tions and car­peted the ocean floor. It served as both nest and nour­ish­ment for myr­i­ads of crus­taceans and mol­lusks, for crabs and cut­tle­fish. Here seals and ot­ters could in­dulge in a sump­tu­ous meal, mix­ing meat from fish with veg­eta­bles from the sea, like the English with their Ir­ish stews.</p>
				<p>The <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i> passed over these lush, lux­u­ri­ant depths with tremen­dous speed. Near evening it ap­proached the Falk­land Is­lands, whose rugged sum­mits I rec­og­nized the next day. The sea was of mod­er­ate depth. So not with­out good rea­son, I as­sumed that these two is­lands, plus the many islets sur­round­ing them, used to be part of the Mag­el­lan coast­line. The Falk­land Is­lands were prob­a­bly dis­cov­ered by the fa­mous nav­i­ga­tor John Davis, who gave them the name Davis South­ern Is­lands. Later Sir Richard Hawkins called them the Maiden­land, af­ter the Blessed Vir­gin. Sub­se­quently, at the be­gin­ning of the 18th cen­tury, they were named the Malouines by fish­er­men from Saint-Malo in Brit­tany, then fi­nally dubbed the Falk­lands by the English, to whom they be­long to­day.</p>
				<p>In these wa­ter­ways our nets brought up fine sam­ples of al­gae, in par­tic­u­lar cer­tain fu­cus plants whose roots were laden with the world’s best mus­sels. Geese and duck alighted by the dozens on the plat­form and soon took their places in the ship’s pantry. As for fish, I specif­i­cally ob­served some bony fish be­long­ing to the goby genus, es­pe­cially some gud­geon two decime­ters long, sprin­kled with whitish and yel­low spots.</p>
				<p>I like­wise mar­veled at the nu­mer­ous medusas, in­clud­ing the most beau­ti­ful of their breed, the com­pass jel­ly­fish, unique to the Falk­land seas. Some of these jel­ly­fish were shaped like very smooth, semi­spheric para­sols with rus­set stripes and fringes of twelve neat fes­toons. Others looked like up­side-down bas­kets from which wide leaves and long red twigs were grace­fully trail­ing. They swam with quiv­er­ings of their four leaflike arms, let­ting the op­u­lent tresses of their ten­ta­cles dan­gle in the drift. I wanted to pre­serve a few spec­i­mens of these del­i­cate zoophytes, but they were merely clouds, shad­ows, il­lu­sions, melt­ing and evap­o­rat­ing out­side their na­tive el­e­ment.</p>
				<p>When the last tips of the Falk­land Is­lands had dis­ap­peared be­low the hori­zon, the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i> sub­merged to a depth be­tween twenty and twenty-five me­ters and went along the South Amer­i­can coast. Cap­tain Nemo didn’t put in an ap­pear­ance.</p>
				<p>We didn’t leave these Patag­o­nian wa­ter­ways un­til April 3, some­times cruis­ing un­der the ocean, some­times on its sur­face. The <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i> passed the wide es­tu­ary formed by the mouth of the Rio de la Plata, and on April 4 we lay abreast of Uruguay, al­beit fifty miles out. Keep­ing to its northerly head­ing, it fol­lowed the long wind­ings of South Amer­ica. By then we had fared 16,000 leagues since com­ing on board in the seas of Ja­pan.</p>
				<p>Near eleven o’clock in the morn­ing, we cut the Tropic of Capri­corn on the 37th merid­ian, pass­ing well out from Cape Frio. Much to Ned Land’s dis­plea­sure, Cap­tain Nemo had no lik­ing for the neigh­bor­hood of Brazil’s pop­u­lous shores, be­cause he shot by with dizzy­ing speed. Not even the swiftest fish or birds could keep up with us, and the nat­u­ral cu­riosi­ties in these seas com­pletely eluded our ob­ser­va­tion.</p>
				<p>This speed was main­tained for sev­eral days, and on the evening of April 9, we raised South Amer­ica’s east­ern­most tip, Cape São Roque. But then the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i> veered away again and went look­ing for the low­est depths of an un­der­wa­ter val­ley gouged be­tween this cape and Sierra Leone on the coast of Africa. Abreast of the West Indies, this val­ley forks into two arms, and to the north it ends in an enor­mous de­pres­sion 9,000 me­ters deep. From this lo­cal­ity to the Lesser An­tilles, the ocean’s ge­o­logic pro­file fea­tures a steeply cut cliff six kilo­me­ters high, and abreast of the Cape Verde Is­lands, there’s an­other wall just as im­pos­ing; to­gether these two bar­ri­cades con­fine the whole sub­merged con­ti­nent of At­lantis. The floor of this im­mense val­ley is made pic­turesque by moun­tains that fur­nish these un­der­wa­ter depths with scenic views. This de­scrip­tion is based mostly on cer­tain hand-drawn charts kept in the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i>’s li­brary, charts ob­vi­ously ren­dered by Cap­tain Nemo him­self from his own per­sonal ob­ser­va­tions.</p>
				<p>For two days we vis­ited these deep and de­serted wa­ters by means of our slant­ing fins. The <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i> would do long, di­ag­o­nal dives that took us to ev­ery level. But on April 11 it rose sud­denly, and the shore reap­peared at the mouth of the Ama­zon River, a huge es­tu­ary whose out­flow is so con­sid­er­able, it de­salts the sea over an area of sev­eral leagues.</p>
				<p>We cut the Equa­tor. Twenty miles to the west lay Guiana, French ter­ri­tory where we could eas­ily have taken refuge. But the wind was blow­ing a strong gust, and the fu­ri­ous bil­lows would not al­low us to face them in a mere skiff. No doubt Ned Land un­der­stood this be­cause he said noth­ing to me. For my part, I made no al­lu­sion to his es­cape plans be­cause I didn’t want to push him into an at­tempt that was cer­tain to mis­fire.</p>
				<p>I was read­ily com­pen­sated for this de­lay by fas­ci­nat­ing re­search. Dur­ing those two days of April 11–12, the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i> didn’t leave the sur­face of the sea, and its trawl brought up a sim­ply mirac­u­lous catch of zoophytes, fish, and rep­tiles.</p>
				<p>Some zoophytes were dredged up by the chain of our trawl. Most were lovely sea anemone be­long­ing to the fam­ily <i epub:type="z3998:taxonomy">Ac­tini­dia</i>, in­clud­ing among other species, the <i epub:type="z3998:taxonomy">Phyc­talis pro­texta</i>, na­tive to this part of the ocean: a small cylin­dri­cal trunk adorned with ver­ti­cal lines, mot­tled with red spots, and crowned by a won­drous blos­som­ing of ten­ta­cles. As for mol­lusks, they con­sisted of ex­hibits I had al­ready ob­served: tur­ret snails, olive shells of the “tent olive” species with neatly in­ter­sect­ing lines and rus­set spots stand­ing out sharply against a flesh-col­ored back­ground, fan­ci­ful spi­der conchs that looked like pet­ri­fied scor­pi­ons, trans­par­ent glass snails, arg­onauts, some highly ed­i­ble cut­tle­fish, and cer­tain species of squid that the nat­u­ral­ists of an­tiq­uity clas­si­fied with the fly­ing fish, which are used chiefly as bait for catch­ing cod.</p>
				<p>As for the fish in these wa­ter­ways, I noted var­i­ous species that I hadn’t yet had the op­por­tu­nity to study. Among car­ti­lagi­nous fish: some brook lam­prey, a type of eel fif­teen inches long, head green­ish, fins vi­o­let, back bluish gray, belly a sil­very brown strewn with bright spots, iris of the eye en­cir­cled in gold, un­usual an­i­mals that the Ama­zon’s cur­rent must have swept out to sea be­cause their nat­u­ral habi­tat is fresh wa­ter; sting rays, the snout pointed, the tail long, slen­der, and armed with an ex­ten­sive jagged sting; small one-me­ter sharks with gray and whitish hides, their teeth ar­ranged in sev­eral back­ward-curv­ing rows, fish com­monly known by the name car­pet shark; bat­fish, a sort of red­dish isosce­les tri­an­gle half a me­ter long, whose pec­toral fins are at­tached by fleshy ex­ten­sions that make these fish look like bats, al­though an ap­pendage made of horn, lo­cated near the nos­trils, earns them the nick­name of sea uni­corns; lastly, a cou­ple species of trig­ger­fish, the cu­cuyo whose stip­pled flanks glit­ter with a sparkling gold color, and the bright pur­ple leather­jacket whose hues glis­ten like a pi­geon’s throat.</p>
				<p>I’ll fin­ish up this cat­a­log, a lit­tle dry but quite ac­cu­rate, with the se­ries of bony fish I ob­served: eels be­long­ing to the genus <i epub:type="z3998:taxonomy">Apterono­tus</i> whose snow-white snout is very blunt, the body painted a hand­some black and armed with a very long, slen­der, fleshy whip; long sar­dines from the genus <i epub:type="z3998:taxonomy">Odon­tog­nathus</i>, like three-decime­ter pike, shin­ing with a bright sil­ver glow; Guara­nian mack­erel fur­nished with two anal fins; black-tinted rud­der­fish that you catch by us­ing torches, fish mea­sur­ing two me­ters and boast­ing white, firm, plump meat that, when fresh, tastes like eel, when dried, like smoked salmon; semired wrasse sport­ing scales only at the bases of their dor­sal and anal fins; grunts on which gold and sil­ver min­gle their lus­ter with that of ruby and topaz; yel­low-tailed gilt­head whose flesh is ex­tremely dainty and whose phos­pho­res­cent prop­er­ties give them away in the midst of the wa­ters; por­gies tinted or­ange, with slen­der tongues; croak­ers with gold cau­dal fins; black sur­geon­fish; four-eyed fish from Suri­nam, etc.</p>
				<p>This “et cetera” won’t keep me from men­tion­ing one more fish that Con­seil, with good rea­son, will long re­mem­ber.</p>
				<p>One of our nets had hauled up a type of very flat ray that weighed some twenty kilo­grams; with its tail cut off, it would have formed a per­fect disk. It was white un­der­neath and red­dish on top, with big round spots of deep blue en­cir­cled in black, its hide quite smooth and end­ing in a dou­ble-lobed fin. Laid out on the plat­form, it kept strug­gling with con­vul­sive move­ments, try­ing to turn over, mak­ing such ef­forts that its fi­nal lunge was about to flip it into the sea. But Con­seil, be­ing very pos­ses­sive of his fish, rushed at it, and be­fore I could stop him, he seized it with both hands.</p>
				<p>In­stantly there he was, thrown on his back, legs in the air, his body half par­a­lyzed, and yelling:</p>
				<p>“Oh, sir, sir! Will you help me!”</p>
				<p>For once in his life, the poor lad didn’t ad­dress me “in the third per­son.”</p>
				<p>The Cana­dian and I sat him up; we mas­saged his con­tracted arms, and when he re­gained his five senses, that eter­nal clas­si­fier mum­bled in a bro­ken voice:</p>
				<p>“Class of <i epub:type="z3998:taxonomy">car­ti­lagi­nous</i> fish, or­der <i epub:type="z3998:taxonomy">Chon­droptery­gia</i> with fixed gills, sub­or­der <i epub:type="z3998:taxonomy">Sela­cia</i>, fam­ily <i epub:type="z3998:taxonomy">Ra­ji­iforma</i>, genus <i epub:type="z3998:taxonomy">elec­tric ray</i>.”</p>
				<p>“Yes, my friend,” I an­swered, “it was an elec­tric ray that put you in this de­plorable state.”</p>
				<p>“Oh, mas­ter can trust me on this,” Con­seil shot back. “I’ll be re­venged on that an­i­mal!”</p>
				<p>“How?”</p>
				<p>“I’ll eat it.”</p>
				<p>Which he did that same evening, but strictly as re­tal­i­a­tion. Be­cause, frankly, it tasted like leather.</p>
				<p>Poor Con­seil had as­saulted an elec­tric ray of the most dan­ger­ous species, the <i epub:type="z3998:taxonomy">cumana</i>. Liv­ing in a con­duct­ing medium such as wa­ter, this bizarre an­i­mal can elec­tro­cute other fish from sev­eral me­ters away, so great is the power of its elec­tric or­gan, an or­gan whose two chief sur­faces mea­sure at least twenty-seven square feet.</p>
				<p>Dur­ing the course of the next day, April 12, the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i> drew near the coast of Dutch Guiana, by the mouth of the Ma­roni River. There sev­eral groups of sea cows were liv­ing in fam­ily units. Th­ese were man­a­tees, which be­long to the or­der <i epub:type="z3998:taxonomy">Sire­nia,</i> like the dugong and Steller’s sea cow. Harm­less and un­ag­gres­sive, these fine an­i­mals were six to seven me­ters long and must have weighed at least 4,000 kilo­grams each. I told Ned Land and Con­seil that farsee­ing na­ture had given these mam­mals a ma­jor role to play. In essence, man­a­tees, like seals, are de­signed to graze the un­der­wa­ter prairies, de­stroy­ing the clus­ters of weeds that ob­struct the mouths of trop­i­cal rivers.</p>
				<p>“And do you know,” I added, “what hap­pened since man has al­most com­pletely wiped out these ben­e­fi­cial races? Rot­ting weeds have poi­soned the air, and this poi­soned air causes the yel­low fever that dev­as­tates these won­der­ful coun­tries. This toxic veg­e­ta­tion has in­creased be­neath the seas of the Tor­rid Zone, so the dis­ease spreads unchecked from the mouth of the Rio de la Plata to Florida!”</p>
				<p>And if Pro­fes­sor Toussenel is cor­rect, this plague is noth­ing com­pared to the scourge that will strike our de­scen­dants once the seas are de­pop­u­lated of whales and seals. By then, crowded with jel­ly­fish, squid, and other dev­il­fish, the oceans will have be­come huge cen­ters of in­fec­tion, be­cause their waves will no longer pos­sess “these huge stom­achs that God has en­trusted with scour­ing the sur­face of the sea.”</p>
				<p>Mean­while, with­out scorn­ing these the­o­ries, the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i>’s crew cap­tured half a dozen man­a­tees. In essence, it was an is­sue of stock­ing the larder with ex­cel­lent red meat, even bet­ter than beef or veal. Their hunt­ing was not a fas­ci­nat­ing sport. The man­a­tees let them­selves be struck down with­out of­fer­ing any re­sis­tance. Sev­eral thou­sand ki­los of meat were hauled be­low, to be dried and stored.</p>
				<p>The same day an odd fish­ing prac­tice fur­ther in­creased the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i>’s stores, so full of game were these seas. Our trawl brought up in its meshes a num­ber of fish whose heads were topped by lit­tle oval slabs with fleshy edges. Th­ese were suck­er­fish from the third fam­ily of the sub­brachian <i epub:type="z3998:taxonomy">Mala­coptery­gia</i>. Th­ese flat disks on their heads con­sist of cross­wise plates of mov­able car­ti­lage, be­tween which the an­i­mals can cre­ate a vac­uum, en­abling them to stick to ob­jects like suc­tion cups.</p>
				<p>The re­moras I had ob­served in the Mediter­ranean were re­lated to this species. But the crea­ture at is­sue here was an <i epub:type="z3998:taxonomy">Ech­eneis os­teochara</i>, unique to this sea. Right af­ter catch­ing them, our sea­men dropped them in buck­ets of wa­ter.</p>
				<p>Its fish­ing fin­ished, the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i> drew nearer to the coast. In this lo­cal­ity a num­ber of sea tur­tles were sleep­ing on the sur­face of the waves. It would have been dif­fi­cult to cap­ture these valu­able rep­tiles, be­cause they wake up at the slight­est sound, and their solid cara­paces are har­poon-proof. But our suck­er­fish would ef­fect their cap­ture with ex­tra­or­di­nary cer­tainty and pre­ci­sion. In truth, this an­i­mal is a liv­ing fish­hook, promis­ing wealth and hap­pi­ness to the green­est fish­er­man in the busi­ness.</p>
				<p>The <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i>’s men at­tached to each fish’s tail a ring that was big enough not to ham­per its move­ments, and to this ring a long rope whose other end was moored on board.</p>
				<p>Thrown into the sea, the suck­er­fish im­me­di­ately be­gan to play their roles, go­ing and fas­ten­ing them­selves onto the breast­plates of the tur­tles. Their tenac­ity was so great, they would rip apart rather than let go. They were hauled in, still stick­ing to the tur­tles that came aboard with them.</p>
				<p>In this way we caught sev­eral log­ger­heads, rep­tiles a me­ter wide and weigh­ing 200 ki­los. They’re ex­tremely valu­able be­cause of their cara­paces, which are cov­ered with big slabs of horn, thin, brown, trans­par­ent, with white and yel­low mark­ings. Be­sides, they were ex­cel­lent from an ed­i­ble view­point, with an ex­quis­ite fla­vor com­pa­ra­ble to the green tur­tle.</p>
				<p>This fish­ing ended our stay in the wa­ter­ways of the Ama­zon, and that evening the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i> took to the high seas once more.</p>
			</section>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
