<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="en-US" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: http://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Chapter 17</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="part-1" epub:type="part">
			<section id="chapter-1-17" epub:type="chapter">
				<h3 epub:type="title">
					<span class="first-child" epub:type="z3998:roman">XVII</span>
					<span class="epub-type-subtitle" epub:type="subtitle">An Underwater Forest</span>
				</h3>
				<p>We had fi­nally ar­rived on the out­skirts of this for­est, surely one of the finest in Cap­tain Nemo’s im­mense do­mains. He re­garded it as his own and had laid the same claim to it that, in the first days of the world, the first men had to their forests on land. Be­sides, who else could dis­pute his own­er­ship of this un­der­wa­ter prop­erty? What other, bolder pi­o­neer would come, ax in hand, to clear away its dark un­der­brush?</p>
				<p>This for­est was made up of big tree­like plants, and when we en­tered be­neath their huge arches, my eyes were in­stantly struck by the unique ar­range­ment of their branches—an ar­range­ment that I had never be­fore en­coun­tered.</p>
				<p>None of the weeds car­pet­ing the seafloor, none of the branches bristling from the shrub­bery, crept, or leaned, or stretched on a hor­i­zon­tal plane. They all rose right up to­ward the sur­face of the ocean. Every fil­a­ment or rib­bon, no mat­ter how thin, stood ram­rod straight. Fu­cus plants and creep­ers were grow­ing in stiff per­pen­dic­u­lar lines, gov­erned by the den­sity of the el­e­ment that gen­er­ated them. After I parted them with my hands, these oth­er­wise mo­tion­less plants would shoot right back to their orig­i­nal po­si­tions. It was the regime of ver­ti­cal­ity.</p>
				<p>I soon grew ac­cus­tomed to this bizarre ar­range­ment, like­wise to the com­par­a­tive dark­ness sur­round­ing us. The seafloor in this for­est was strewn with sharp chunks of stone that were hard to avoid. Here the range of un­der­wa­ter flora seemed pretty com­pre­hen­sive to me, as well as more abun­dant than it might have been in the arc­tic or trop­i­cal zones, where such ex­hibits are less com­mon. But for a few min­utes I kept ac­ci­den­tally con­fus­ing the two king­doms, mis­tak­ing zoophytes for wa­ter plants, an­i­mals for veg­eta­bles. And who hasn’t made the same blun­der? Flora and fauna are so closely as­so­ci­ated in the un­der­wa­ter world!</p>
				<p>I ob­served that all these ex­hibits from the veg­etable king­dom were at­tached to the seafloor by only the most makeshift meth­ods. They had no roots and didn’t care which solid ob­jects se­cured them, sand, shells, husks, or peb­bles; they didn’t ask their hosts for sus­te­nance, just a point of pur­chase. Th­ese plants are en­tirely self-prop­a­gat­ing, and the prin­ci­ple of their ex­is­tence lies in the wa­ter that sus­tains and nour­ishes them. In place of leaves, most of them sprouted blades of un­pre­dictable shape, which were con­fined to a nar­row gamut of col­ors con­sist­ing only of pink, crim­son, green, olive, tan, and brown. There I saw again, but not yet pressed and dried like the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i>’s spec­i­mens, some pea­cock’s tails spread open like fans to stir up a cool­ing breeze, scar­let rose­tan­gle, sea tan­gle stretch­ing out their young and ed­i­ble shoots, twist­ing strings of kelp from the genus <i epub:type="z3998:taxonomy">Nere­o­cys­tis</i> that bloomed to a height of fif­teen me­ters, bou­quets of mer­maid’s cups whose stems grew wider at the top, and a num­ber of other open-sea plants, all with­out flow­ers. “It’s an odd anom­aly in this bizarre el­e­ment!” as one witty nat­u­ral­ist puts it. “The an­i­mal king­dom blos­soms, and the veg­etable king­dom doesn’t!”</p>
				<p>Th­ese var­i­ous types of shrub­bery were as big as trees in the tem­per­ate zones; in the damp shade be­tween them, there were clus­tered ac­tual bushes of mov­ing flow­ers, hedges of zoophytes in which there grew stony coral striped with twist­ing fur­rows, yel­low­ish sea anemone from the genus <i epub:type="z3998:taxonomy">Caryophylia</i> with translu­cent ten­ta­cles, plus anemone with grassy tufts from the genus <i epub:type="z3998:taxonomy">Zoan­tharia</i>; and to com­plete the il­lu­sion, min­nows flit­ted from branch to branch like a swarm of hum­ming­birds, while there rose un­der­foot, like a covey of snipe, yel­low fish from the genus <i epub:type="z3998:taxonomy">Lepiso­can­thus</i> with bristling jaws and sharp scales, fly­ing gurnards, and pinecone fish.</p>
				<p>Near one o’clock, Cap­tain Nemo gave the sig­nal to halt. Speak­ing for my­self, I was glad to oblige, and we stretched out be­neath an ar­bor of winged kelp, whose long thin ten­drils stood up like ar­rows.</p>
				<p>This short break was a de­light. It lacked only the charm of con­ver­sa­tion. But it was im­pos­si­ble to speak, im­pos­si­ble to re­ply. I sim­ply nudged my big cop­per head­piece against Con­seil’s head­piece. I saw a happy gleam in the gal­lant lad’s eyes, and to com­mu­ni­cate his plea­sure, he jig­gled around in­side his cara­pace in the world’s sil­li­est way.</p>
				<p>After four hours of strolling, I was quite as­ton­ished not to feel any in­tense hunger. What kept my stom­ach in such a good mood I’m un­able to say. But, in ex­change, I ex­pe­ri­enced that ir­re­sistible de­sire for sleep that comes over ev­ery diver. Ac­cord­ingly, my eyes soon closed be­hind their heavy glass win­dows and I fell into an un­con­trol­lable doze, which un­til then I had been able to fight off only through the move­ments of our walk­ing. Cap­tain Nemo and his mus­cu­lar com­pan­ion were al­ready stretched out in this clear crys­tal, set­ting us a fine nap­time ex­am­ple.</p>
				<p>How long I was sunk in this tor­por I can­not es­ti­mate; but when I awoke, it seemed as if the sun were set­tling to­ward the hori­zon. Cap­tain Nemo was al­ready up, and I had started to stretch my limbs, when an un­ex­pected ap­pari­tion brought me sharply to my feet.</p>
				<p>A few paces away, a mon­strous, me­ter-high sea spi­der was star­ing at me with beady eyes, poised to spring at me. Although my div­ing suit was heavy enough to pro­tect me from this an­i­mal’s bites, I couldn’t keep back a shud­der of hor­ror. Just then Con­seil woke up, to­gether with the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i>’s sailor. Cap­tain Nemo alerted his com­pan­ion to this hideous crus­tacean, which a swing of the ri­fle butt quickly brought down, and I watched the mon­ster’s hor­ri­ble legs writhing in dread­ful con­vul­sions.</p>
				<p>This en­counter re­minded me that other, more daunt­ing an­i­mals must be lurk­ing in these dark reaches, and my div­ing suit might not be ad­e­quate pro­tec­tion against their at­tacks. Such thoughts hadn’t pre­vi­ously crossed my mind, and I was de­ter­mined to keep on my guard. Mean­while I had as­sumed this rest pe­riod would be the turn­ing point in our stroll, but I was mis­taken; and in­stead of head­ing back to the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i>, Cap­tain Nemo con­tin­ued his dar­ing ex­cur­sion.</p>
				<p>The seafloor kept sink­ing, and its sig­nif­i­cantly steeper slope took us to greater depths. It must have been nearly three o’clock when we reached a nar­row val­ley gouged be­tween high, ver­ti­cal walls and lo­cated 150 me­ters down. Thanks to the per­fec­tion of our equip­ment, we had thus gone ninety me­ters be­low the limit that na­ture had, un­til then, set on man’s un­der­wa­ter ex­cur­sions.</p>
				<p>I say 150 me­ters, al­though I had no in­stru­ments for es­ti­mat­ing this dis­tance. But I knew that the sun’s rays, even in the clear­est seas, could reach no deeper. So at pre­cisely this point the dark­ness be­came pro­found. Not a sin­gle ob­ject was vis­i­ble past ten paces. Con­se­quently, I had be­gun to grope my way when sud­denly I saw the glow of an in­tense white light. Cap­tain Nemo had just ac­ti­vated his elec­tric de­vice. His com­pan­ion did like­wise. Con­seil and I fol­lowed suit. By turn­ing a switch, I es­tab­lished con­tact be­tween the in­duc­tion coil and the glass spi­ral, and the sea, lit up by our four lanterns, was il­lu­mi­nated for a ra­dius of twenty-five me­ters.</p>
				<p>Cap­tain Nemo con­tin­ued to plum­met into the dark depths of this for­est, whose shrub­bery grew ever more sparse. I ob­served that veg­etable life was dis­ap­pear­ing more quickly than an­i­mal life. The open-sea plants had al­ready left be­hind the in­creas­ingly arid seafloor, where a prodi­gious num­ber of an­i­mals were still swarm­ing: zoophytes, ar­tic­u­lates, mol­lusks, and fish.</p>
				<p>While we were walk­ing, I thought the lights of our Ruhmko­rff de­vices would au­to­mat­i­cally at­tract some in­hab­i­tants of these dark strata. But if they did ap­proach us, at least they kept at a dis­tance re­gret­table from the hunter’s stand­point. Sev­eral times I saw Cap­tain Nemo stop and take aim with his ri­fle; then, af­ter sight­ing down its bar­rel for a few sec­onds, he would straighten up and re­sume his walk.</p>
				<p>Fi­nally, at around four o’clock, this mar­velous ex­cur­sion came to an end. A wall of su­perb rocks stood be­fore us, im­pos­ing in its sheer mass: a pile of gi­gan­tic stone blocks, an enor­mous gran­ite cliff­side pit­ted with dark caves but not of­fer­ing a sin­gle gra­di­ent we could climb up. This was the un­der­pin­ning of Cre­spo Is­land. This was land.</p>
				<p>The cap­tain stopped sud­denly. A ges­ture from him brought us to a halt, and how­ever much I wanted to clear this wall, I had to stop. Here ended the do­mains of Cap­tain Nemo. He had no de­sire to pass be­yond them. Farther on lay a part of the globe he would no longer tread un­der­foot.</p>
				<p>Our re­turn jour­ney be­gan. Cap­tain Nemo re­sumed the lead in our lit­tle band, al­ways head­ing for­ward with­out hes­i­ta­tion. I noted that we didn’t fol­low the same path in re­turn­ing to the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i>. This new route, very steep and hence very ar­du­ous, quickly took us close to the sur­face of the sea. But this re­turn to the up­per strata wasn’t so sud­den that de­com­pres­sion took place too quickly, which could have led to se­ri­ous or­ganic dis­or­ders and given us those in­ter­nal in­juries so fa­tal to divers. With great prompt­ness, the light reap­peared and grew stronger; and the re­frac­tion of the sun, al­ready low on the hori­zon, again ringed the edges of var­i­ous ob­jects with the en­tire color spec­trum.</p>
				<p>At a depth of ten me­ters, we walked amid a swarm of small fish from ev­ery species, more nu­mer­ous than birds in the air, more ag­ile too; but no aquatic game wor­thy of a gun­shot had yet been of­fered to our eyes.</p>
				<p>Just then I saw the cap­tain’s weapon spring to his shoul­der and track a mov­ing ob­ject through the bushes. A shot went off, I heard a faint hiss­ing, and an an­i­mal dropped a few paces away, lit­er­ally struck by light­ning.</p>
				<p>It was a mag­nif­i­cent sea ot­ter from the genus <i epub:type="z3998:taxonomy">En­hy­dra</i>, the only ex­clu­sively ma­rine quadruped. One and a half me­ters long, this ot­ter had to be worth a good high price. Its coat, chest­nut brown above and sil­ver be­low, would have made one of those won­der­ful fur pieces so much in de­mand in the Rus­sian and Chi­nese mar­kets; the fine­ness and lus­ter of its pelt guar­an­teed that it would go for at least 2,000 francs. I was full of won­der­ment at this un­usual mam­mal, with its cir­cu­lar head adorned by short ears, its round eyes, its white whiskers like those on a cat, its webbed and clawed feet, its bushy tail. Hunted and trapped by fish­er­men, this valu­able car­ni­vore has be­come ex­tremely rare, and it takes refuge chiefly in the north­ern­most parts of the Pa­cific, where in all like­li­hood its species will soon be fac­ing ex­tinc­tion.</p>
				<p>Cap­tain Nemo’s com­pan­ion picked up the an­i­mal, loaded it on his shoul­der, and we took to the trail again.</p>
				<p>For an hour plains of sand un­rolled be­fore our steps. Often the seafloor rose to within two me­ters of the sur­face of the wa­ter. I could then see our im­ages clearly mir­rored on the un­der­side of the waves, but re­flected up­side down: above us there ap­peared an iden­ti­cal band that du­pli­cated our ev­ery move­ment and ges­ture; in short, a per­fect like­ness of the quar­tet near which it walked, but with heads down and feet in the air.</p>
				<p>Another un­usual ef­fect. Heavy clouds passed above us, form­ing and fad­ing swiftly. But af­ter think­ing it over, I re­al­ized that these so-called clouds were caused sim­ply by the chang­ing den­si­ties of the long ground swells, and I even spot­ted the foam­ing “white caps” that their break­ing crests were pro­lif­er­at­ing over the sur­face of the wa­ter. Lastly, I couldn’t help see­ing the ac­tual shad­ows of large birds pass­ing over our heads, swiftly skim­ming the sur­face of the sea.</p>
				<p>On this oc­ca­sion I wit­nessed one of the finest gun­shots ever to thrill the mar­row of a hunter. A large bird with a wide wing­span, quite clearly vis­i­ble, ap­proached and hov­ered over us. When it was just a few me­ters above the waves, Cap­tain Nemo’s com­pan­ion took aim and fired. The an­i­mal dropped, elec­tro­cuted, and its de­scent brought it within reach of our adroit hunter, who promptly took pos­ses­sion of it. It was an al­ba­tross of the finest species, a won­der­ful spec­i­men of these open-sea fowl.</p>
				<p>This in­ci­dent did not in­ter­rupt our walk. For two hours we were some­times led over plains of sand, some­times over prairies of sea­weed that were quite ar­du­ous to cross. In all hon­esty, I was dead tired by the time I spot­ted a hazy glow half a mile away, cut­ting through the dark­ness of the wa­ters. It was the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i>’s bea­con. Within twenty min­utes we would be on board, and there I could breathe easy again—be­cause my tank’s cur­rent air sup­ply seemed to be quite low in oxy­gen. But I was reck­on­ing with­out an en­counter that slightly de­layed our ar­rival.</p>
				<p>I was lag­ging be­hind some twenty paces when I saw Cap­tain Nemo sud­denly come back to­ward me. With his pow­er­ful hands he sent me buck­ling to the ground, while his com­pan­ion did the same to Con­seil. At first I didn’t know what to make of this sud­den as­sault, but I was re­as­sured to ob­serve the cap­tain ly­ing mo­tion­less be­side me.</p>
				<p>I was stretched out on the seafloor di­rectly be­neath some bushes of al­gae, when I raised my head and spied two enor­mous masses hurtling by, throw­ing off phos­pho­res­cent glim­mers.</p>
				<p>My blood turned cold in my veins! I saw that we were un­der threat from a fear­some pair of sharks. They were blue sharks, dread­ful man-eaters with enor­mous tails, dull, glassy stares, and phos­pho­res­cent mat­ter ooz­ing from holes around their snouts. They were like mon­strous fire­flies that could thor­oughly pul­ver­ize a man in their iron jaws! I don’t know if Con­seil was busy with their clas­si­fi­ca­tion, but as for me, I looked at their sil­ver bel­lies, their fear­some mouths bristling with teeth, from a view­point less than sci­en­tific—more as a vic­tim than as a pro­fes­sor of nat­u­ral his­tory.</p>
				<p>Luck­ily these vo­ra­cious an­i­mals have poor eye­sight. They went by with­out notic­ing us, graz­ing us with their brown­ish fins; and mirac­u­lously, we es­caped a dan­ger greater than en­coun­ter­ing a tiger deep in the jun­gle.</p>
				<p>Half an hour later, guided by its elec­tric trail, we reached the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i>. The out­side door had been left open, and Cap­tain Nemo closed it af­ter we reen­tered the first cell. Then he pressed a but­ton. I heard pumps op­er­at­ing within the ship, I felt the wa­ter low­er­ing around me, and in a few mo­ments the cell was com­pletely empty. The in­side door opened, and we passed into the wardrobe.</p>
				<p>There our div­ing suits were re­moved, not with­out dif­fi­culty; and ut­terly ex­hausted, faint from lack of food and rest, I re­paired to my state­room, full of won­der at this star­tling ex­cur­sion on the bot­tom of the sea.</p>
			</section>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
