<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="en-US" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: http://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Chapter 19</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="part-2" epub:type="part">
			<section id="chapter-2-19" epub:type="chapter">
				<h3 epub:type="title">
					<span class="first-child" epub:type="z3998:roman">XIX</span>
					<span class="epub-type-subtitle" epub:type="subtitle">The Gulf Streams</span>
				</h3>
				<p>This dread­ful scene on April 20 none of us will ever be able to for­get. I wrote it up in a state of in­tense ex­cite­ment. Later I re­viewed my nar­ra­tive. I read it to Con­seil and the Cana­dian. They found it ac­cu­rate in de­tail but de­fi­cient in im­pact. To con­vey such sights, it would take the pen of our most fa­mous poet, Vic­tor Hugo, au­thor of <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">The Toil­ers of the Sea</i>.</p>
				<p>As I said, Cap­tain Nemo wept while star­ing at the waves. His grief was im­mense. This was the sec­ond com­pan­ion he had lost since we had come aboard. And what a way to die! Smashed, stran­gled, crushed by the fear­some arms of a dev­il­fish, ground be­tween its iron mandibles, this friend would never rest with his com­pan­ions in the placid wa­ters of their coral ceme­tery!</p>
				<p>As for me, what had har­rowed my heart in the thick of this strug­gle was the de­spair­ing yell given by this un­for­tu­nate man. For­get­ting his reg­u­la­tion lan­guage, this poor French­man had re­verted to speak­ing his own mother tongue to fling out one supreme plea! Among the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i>’s crew, al­lied body and soul with Cap­tain Nemo and like­wise flee­ing from hu­man con­tact, I had found a fel­low coun­try­man! Was he the only rep­re­sen­ta­tive of France in this mys­te­ri­ous al­liance, ob­vi­ously made up of in­di­vid­u­als from dif­fer­ent na­tion­al­i­ties? This was just one more of those in­sol­u­ble prob­lems that kept welling up in my mind!</p>
				<p>Cap­tain Nemo reen­tered his state­room, and I saw no more of him for a good while. But how sad, de­spair­ing, and ir­res­o­lute he must have felt, to judge from this ship whose soul he was, which re­flected his ev­ery mood! The <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i> no longer kept to a fixed head­ing. It drifted back and forth, rid­ing with the waves like a corpse. Its pro­pel­ler had been dis­en­tan­gled but was barely put to use. It was nav­i­gat­ing at ran­dom. It couldn’t tear it­self away from the set­ting of this last strug­gle, from this sea that had de­voured one of its own!</p>
				<p>Ten days went by in this way. It was only on May 1 that the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i> openly re­sumed its north­bound course, af­ter rais­ing the Ba­hamas at the mouth of Old Ba­hama Chan­nel. We then went with the cur­rent of the sea’s great­est river, which has its own banks, fish, and tem­per­a­ture. I mean the Gulf Stream.</p>
				<p>It is in­deed a river that runs in­de­pen­dently through the mid­dle of the At­lantic, its wa­ters never mix­ing with the ocean’s wa­ters. It’s a salty river, saltier than the sea sur­round­ing it. Its av­er­age depth is 3,000 feet, its av­er­age width sixty miles. In cer­tain lo­cal­i­ties its cur­rent moves at a speed of four kilo­me­ters per hour. The un­chang­ing vol­ume of its wa­ters is greater than that of all the world’s rivers com­bined.</p>
				<p>As dis­cov­ered by Com­man­der Maury, the true source of the Gulf Stream, its start­ing point, if you pre­fer, is lo­cated in the Bay of Bis­cay. There its wa­ters, still weak in tem­per­a­ture and color, be­gin to form. It goes down south, skirts equa­to­rial Africa, warms its waves in the rays of the Tor­rid Zone, crosses the At­lantic, reaches Cape São Roque on the coast of Brazil, and forks into two branches, one go­ing to the Caribbean Sea for fur­ther sat­u­ra­tion with heat par­ti­cles. Then, en­trusted with restor­ing the bal­ance be­tween hot and cold tem­per­a­tures and with mix­ing trop­i­cal and north­ern wa­ters, the Gulf Stream be­gins to play its sta­bi­liz­ing role. At­tain­ing a white heat in the Gulf of Mex­ico, it heads north up the Amer­i­can coast, ad­vances as far as New­found­land, swerves away un­der the thrust of a cold cur­rent from the Davis Strait, and re­sumes its ocean course by go­ing along a great cir­cle of the earth on a rhumb line; it then di­vides into two arms near the 43rd par­al­lel; one, helped by the north­east trade winds, re­turns to the Bay of Bis­cay and the Azores; the other washes the shores of Ire­land and Nor­way with luke­warm wa­ter, goes be­yond Spitzber­gen, where its tem­per­a­ture falls to 4° centi­grade, and fash­ions the open sea at the pole.</p>
				<p>It was on this oceanic river that the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i> was then nav­i­gat­ing. Leav­ing Old Ba­hama Chan­nel, which is four­teen leagues wide by 350 me­ters deep, the Gulf Stream moves at the rate of eight kilo­me­ters per hour. Its speed steadily de­creases as it ad­vances north­ward, and we must pray that this steadi­ness con­tin­ues, be­cause, as ex­perts agree, if its speed and di­rec­tion were to change, the cli­mates of Europe would un­dergo dis­tur­bances whose con­se­quences are in­cal­cu­la­ble.</p>
				<p>Near noon I was on the plat­form with Con­seil. I shared with him the rel­e­vant de­tails on the Gulf Stream. When my ex­pla­na­tion was over, I in­vited him to dip his hands into its cur­rent.</p>
				<p>Con­seil did so, and he was quite as­ton­ished to ex­pe­ri­ence no sen­sa­tion of ei­ther hot or cold.</p>
				<p>“That comes,” I told him, “from the wa­ter tem­per­a­ture of the Gulf Stream, which, as it leaves the Gulf of Mex­ico, is barely dif­fer­ent from your blood tem­per­a­ture. This Gulf Stream is a huge heat gen­er­a­tor that en­ables the coasts of Europe to be decked in eter­nal green­ery. And if Com­man­der Maury is cor­rect, were one to har­ness the full warmth of this cur­rent, it would sup­ply enough heat to keep molten a river of iron sol­der as big as the Ama­zon or the Mis­souri.”</p>
				<p>Just then the Gulf Stream’s speed was 2.25 me­ters per sec­ond. So dis­tinct is its cur­rent from the sur­round­ing sea, its con­fined wa­ters stand out against the ocean and op­er­ate on a dif­fer­ent level from the colder wa­ters. Murky as well, and very rich in saline ma­te­rial, their pure in­digo con­trasts with the green waves sur­round­ing them. More­over, their line of de­mar­ca­tion is so clear that abreast of the Caroli­nas, the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i>’s spur cut the waves of the Gulf Stream while its pro­pel­ler was still churn­ing those be­long­ing to the ocean.</p>
				<p>This cur­rent swept along with it a whole host of mov­ing crea­tures. Arg­onauts, so com­mon in the Mediter­ranean, voy­aged here in schools of large num­bers. Among car­ti­lagi­nous fish, the most re­mark­able were rays whose ul­tra slen­der tails made up nearly a third of the body, which was shaped like a huge di­a­mond twenty-five feet long; then lit­tle one-me­ter sharks, the head large, the snout short and rounded, the teeth sharp and ar­ranged in sev­eral rows, the body seem­ingly cov­ered with scales.</p>
				<p>Among bony fish, I noted griz­zled wrasse unique to these seas, deep-wa­ter gilt­head whose iris has a fiery gleam, one-me­ter croak­ers whose large mouths bris­tle with small teeth and which let out thin cries, black rud­der­fish like those I’ve al­ready dis­cussed, blue do­ra­dos ac­cented with gold and sil­ver, rain­bow-hued par­rot­fish that can ri­val the loveli­est trop­i­cal birds in col­or­ing, banded blennies with tri­an­gu­lar heads, bluish floun­der with­out scales, toad­fish cov­ered with a cross­wise yel­low band in the shape of a Greek <i>t</i>, swarms of lit­tle freck­led go­b­ies stip­pled with brown spots, lung­fish with sil­ver heads and yel­low tails, var­i­ous spec­i­mens of salmon, mul­let with slim fig­ures and a softly glow­ing ra­di­ance that Lacépède ded­i­cated to the mem­ory of his wife, and fi­nally the Amer­i­can cav­alla, a hand­some fish dec­o­rated by ev­ery hon­orary or­der, be­di­zened with their ev­ery rib­bon, fre­quent­ing the shores of this great na­tion where rib­bons and or­ders are held in such low es­teem.</p>
				<p>I might add that dur­ing the night, the Gulf Stream’s phos­pho­res­cent wa­ters ri­valed the elec­tric glow of our bea­con, es­pe­cially in the stormy weather that fre­quently threat­ened us.</p>
				<p>On May 8, while abreast of North Carolina, we were across from Cape Hat­teras once more. There the Gulf Stream is sev­enty-five miles wide and 210 me­ters deep. The <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i> con­tin­ued to wan­der at ran­dom. Seem­ingly, all su­per­vi­sion had been jet­ti­soned. Un­der these con­di­tions I ad­mit that we could eas­ily have got­ten away. In fact, the pop­u­lous shores of­fered ready refuge ev­ery­where. The sea was plowed con­tin­u­ously by the many steam­ers pro­vid­ing ser­vice be­tween the Gulf of Mex­ico and New York or Bos­ton, and it was crossed night and day by lit­tle schooners en­gaged in coastal trade over var­i­ous points on the Amer­i­can shore. We could hope to be picked up. So it was a promis­ing op­por­tu­nity, de­spite the thirty miles that sep­a­rated the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i> from these Union coasts.</p>
				<p>But one dis­tress­ing cir­cum­stance to­tally thwarted the Cana­dian’s plans. The weather was thor­oughly foul. We were ap­proach­ing wa­ter­ways where storms are com­mon­place, the very home­land of tor­na­does and cy­clones specif­i­cally en­gen­dered by the Gulf Stream’s cur­rent. To face a fre­quently rag­ing sea in a frail skiff was a race to cer­tain dis­as­ter. Ned Land con­ceded this him­self. So he champed at the bit, in the grip of an in­tense home­sick­ness that could be cured only by our es­cape.</p>
				<p>“Sir,” he told me that day, “it’s got to stop. I want to get to the bot­tom of this. Your Nemo’s veer­ing away from shore and head­ing up north. But be­lieve you me, I had my fill at the South Pole and I’m not go­ing with him to the North Pole.”</p>
				<p>“What can we do, Ned, since it isn’t fea­si­ble to es­cape right now?”</p>
				<p>“I keep com­ing back to my idea. We’ve got to talk to the cap­tain. When we were in your own coun­try’s seas, you didn’t say a word. Now that we’re in mine, I in­tend to speak up. Be­fore a few days are out, I fig­ure the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i> will lie abreast of Nova Sco­tia, and from there to New­found­land is the mouth of a large gulf, and the St. Lawrence emp­ties into that gulf, and the St. Lawrence is my own river, the river run­ning by Que­bec, my home­town—and when I think about all this, my gorge rises and my hair stands on end! Hon­estly, sir, I’d rather jump over­board! I can’t stay here any longer! I’m suf­fo­cat­ing!”</p>
				<p>The Cana­dian was ob­vi­ously at the end of his pa­tience. His vig­or­ous na­ture couldn’t adapt to this pro­tracted im­pris­on­ment. His fa­cial ap­pear­ance was chang­ing by the day. His moods grew gloomier and gloomier. I had a sense of what he was suf­fer­ing be­cause I also was gripped by home­sick­ness. Nearly seven months had gone by with­out our hav­ing any news from shore. More­over, Cap­tain Nemo’s reclu­sive­ness, his changed dis­po­si­tion, and es­pe­cially his to­tal si­lence since the bat­tle with the dev­il­fish all made me see things in a dif­fer­ent light. I no longer felt the en­thu­si­asm of our first days on board. You needed to be Flem­ish like Con­seil to ac­cept these cir­cum­stances, liv­ing in a habi­tat de­signed for cetaceans and other denizens of the deep. Truly, if that gal­lant lad had owned gills in­stead of lungs, I think he would have made an out­stand­ing fish!</p>
				<p>“Well, sir?” Ned Land went on, see­ing that I hadn’t replied.</p>
				<p>“Well, Ned, you want me to ask Cap­tain Nemo what he in­tends to do with us?”</p>
				<p>“Yes, sir.”</p>
				<p>“Even though he has al­ready made that clear?”</p>
				<p>“Yes. I want it set­tled once and for all. Speak just for me, strictly on my be­half, if you want.”</p>
				<p>“But I rarely en­counter him. He pos­i­tively avoids me.”</p>
				<p>“All the more rea­son you should go look him up.”</p>
				<p>“I’ll con­fer with him, Ned.”</p>
				<p>“When?” the Cana­dian asked in­sis­tently.</p>
				<p>“When I en­counter him.”</p>
				<p>“Pro­fes­sor Aron­nax, would you like me to go find him my­self?”</p>
				<p>“No, let me do it. To­mor­row—”</p>
				<p>“To­day,” Ned Land said.</p>
				<p>“So be it. I’ll see him to­day,” I an­swered the Cana­dian, who, if he took ac­tion him­self, would cer­tainly have ru­ined ev­ery­thing.</p>
				<p>I was left to my­self. His re­quest granted, I de­cided to dis­pose of it im­me­di­ately. I like things over and done with.</p>
				<p>I reen­tered my state­room. From there I could hear move­ments in­side Cap­tain Nemo’s quar­ters. I couldn’t pass up this chance for an en­counter. I knocked on his door. I re­ceived no re­ply. I knocked again, then tried the knob. The door opened.</p>
				<p>I en­tered. The cap­tain was there. He was bend­ing over his work­table and hadn’t heard me. Deter­mined not to leave with­out ques­tion­ing him, I drew closer. He looked up sharply, with a frown­ing brow, and said in a pretty stern tone:</p>
				<p>“Oh, it’s you! What do you want?”</p>
				<p>“To speak with you, cap­tain.”</p>
				<p>“But I’m busy, sir, I’m at work. I give you the free­dom to en­joy your pri­vacy, can’t I have the same for my­self?”</p>
				<p>This re­cep­tion was less than en­cour­ag­ing. But I was de­ter­mined to give as good as I got.</p>
				<p>“Sir,” I said coolly, “I need to speak with you on a mat­ter that sim­ply can’t wait.”</p>
				<p>“What­ever could that be, sir?” he replied sar­cas­ti­cally. “Have you made some dis­cov­ery that has es­caped me? Has the sea yielded up some novel se­cret to you?”</p>
				<p>We were miles apart. But be­fore I could re­ply, he showed me a man­u­script open on the ta­ble and told me in a more se­ri­ous tone:</p>
				<p>“Here, Pro­fes­sor Aron­nax, is a man­u­script writ­ten in sev­eral lan­guages. It con­tains a sum­mary of my re­search un­der the sea, and God will­ing, it won’t per­ish with me. Signed with my name, com­plete with my life story, this man­u­script will be en­closed in a small, un­sink­able con­trivance. The last sur­viv­ing man on the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i> will throw this con­trivance into the sea, and it will go wher­ever the waves carry it.”</p>
				<p>The man’s name! His life story writ­ten by him­self! So the se­cret of his ex­is­tence might some­day be un­veiled? But just then I saw this an­nounce­ment only as a lead-in to my topic.</p>
				<p>“Cap­tain,” I replied, “I’m all praise for this idea you’re putting into ef­fect. The fruits of your re­search must not be lost. But the meth­ods you’re us­ing strike me as prim­i­tive. Who knows where the winds will take that con­trivance, into whose hands it may fall? Can’t you find some­thing bet­ter? Can’t you or one of your men—”</p>
				<p>“Never, sir,” the cap­tain said, swiftly in­ter­rupt­ing me.</p>
				<p>“But my com­pan­ions and I would be will­ing to safe­guard this man­u­script, and if you give us back our free­dom—”</p>
				<p>“Your free­dom!” Cap­tain Nemo put in, stand­ing up.</p>
				<p>“Yes, sir, and that’s the sub­ject on which I wanted to con­fer with you. For seven months we’ve been aboard your ves­sel, and I ask you to­day, in the name of my com­pan­ions as well as my­self, if you in­tend to keep us here for­ever.”</p>
				<p>“Pro­fes­sor Aron­nax,” Cap­tain Nemo said, “I’ll an­swer you to­day just as I did seven months ago: who­ever boards the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i> must never leave it.”</p>
				<p>“What you’re in­flict­ing on us is out­right slav­ery!”</p>
				<p>“Call it any­thing you like.”</p>
				<p>“But ev­ery slave has the right to re­cover his free­dom! By any worth­while, avail­able means!”</p>
				<p>“Who has de­nied you that right?” Cap­tain Nemo replied. “Did I ever try to bind you with your word of honor?”</p>
				<p>The cap­tain stared at me, cross­ing his arms.</p>
				<p>“Sir,” I told him, “to take up this sub­ject a sec­ond time would be dis­taste­ful to both of us. So let’s fin­ish what we’ve started. I re­peat: it isn’t just for my­self that I raise this is­sue. To me, re­search is a re­lief, a po­tent di­ver­sion, an en­tice­ment, a pas­sion that can make me for­get ev­ery­thing else. Like you, I’m a man ne­glected and un­known, liv­ing in the faint hope that some­day I can pass on to fu­ture gen­er­a­tions the fruits of my labors—fig­u­ra­tively speak­ing, by means of some con­trivance left to the luck of winds and waves. In short, I can ad­mire you and com­fort­ably go with you while play­ing a role I only partly un­der­stand; but I still catch glimpses of other as­pects of your life that are sur­rounded by in­volve­ments and se­crets that, alone on board, my com­pan­ions and I can’t share. And even when our hearts could beat with yours, moved by some of your griefs or stirred by your deeds of courage and ge­nius, we’ve had to sti­fle even the slight­est to­ken of that sym­pa­thy that arises at the sight of some­thing fine and good, whether it comes from friend or en­emy. All right then! It’s this feel­ing of be­ing alien to your deep­est con­cerns that makes our sit­u­a­tion un­ac­cept­able, im­pos­si­ble, even im­pos­si­ble for me but es­pe­cially for Ned Land. Every man, by virtue of his very hu­man­ity, de­serves fair treat­ment. Have you con­sid­ered how a love of free­dom and ha­tred of slav­ery could lead to plans of vengeance in a tem­per­a­ment like the Cana­dian’s, what he might think, at­tempt, en­deavor … ?”</p>
				<p>I fell silent. Cap­tain Nemo stood up.</p>
				<p>“Ned Land can think, at­tempt, or en­deavor any­thing he wants, what dif­fer­ence is it to me? I didn’t go look­ing for him! I don’t keep him on board for my plea­sure! As for you, Pro­fes­sor Aron­nax, you’re a man able to un­der­stand any­thing, even si­lence. I have noth­ing more to say to you. Let this first time you’ve come to dis­cuss this sub­ject also be the last, be­cause a sec­ond time I won’t even lis­ten.”</p>
				<p>I with­drew. From that day for­ward our po­si­tion was very strained. I re­ported this con­ver­sa­tion to my two com­pan­ions.</p>
				<p>“Now we know,” Ned said, “that we can’t ex­pect a thing from this man. The <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i> is near­ing Long Is­land. We’ll es­cape, no mat­ter what the weather.”</p>
				<p>But the skies be­came more and more threat­en­ing. There were con­spic­u­ous signs of a hur­ri­cane on the way. The at­mos­phere was turn­ing white and milky. Slen­der sheaves of cir­rus clouds were fol­lowed on the hori­zon by lay­ers of nim­bocu­mu­lus. Other low clouds fled swiftly. The sea grew tow­er­ing, in­flated by long swells. Every bird had dis­ap­peared ex­cept a few pe­trels, friends of the storms. The barom­e­ter fell sig­nif­i­cantly, in­di­cat­ing a tremen­dous ten­sion in the sur­round­ing haze. The mix­ture in our stor­m­glass de­com­posed un­der the in­flu­ence of the elec­tric­ity charg­ing the air. A strug­gle of the el­e­ments was ap­proach­ing.</p>
				<p>The storm burst dur­ing the day­time of May 13, just as the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i> was cruis­ing abreast of Long Is­land, a few miles from the nar­rows to Up­per New York Bay. I’m able to de­scribe this strug­gle of the el­e­ments be­cause Cap­tain Nemo didn’t flee into the ocean depths; in­stead, from some in­ex­pli­ca­ble whim, he de­cided to brave it out on the sur­face.</p>
				<p>The wind was blow­ing from the south­west, ini­tially a stiff breeze, in other words, with a speed of fif­teen me­ters per sec­ond, which built to twenty-five me­ters near three o’clock in the af­ter­noon. This is the fig­ure for ma­jor storms.</p>
				<p>Un­shaken by these squalls, Cap­tain Nemo sta­tioned him­self on the plat­form. He was lashed around the waist to with­stand the mon­strous break­ers foam­ing over the deck. I hoisted and at­tached my­self to the same place, di­vid­ing my won­der­ment be­tween the storm and this in­com­pa­ra­ble man who faced it head-on.</p>
				<p>The rag­ing sea was swept with huge tat­tered clouds drenched by the waves. I saw no more of the small in­ter­ven­ing bil­lows that form in the troughs of the big crests. Just long, soot-col­ored un­du­la­tions with crests so com­pact they didn’t foam. They kept grow­ing taller. They were spurring each other on. The <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i>, some­times ly­ing on its side, some­times stand­ing on end like a mast, rolled and pitched fright­fully.</p>
				<p>Near five o’clock a tor­ren­tial rain fell, but it lulled nei­ther wind nor sea. The hur­ri­cane was un­leashed at a speed of forty-five me­ters per sec­ond, hence al­most forty leagues per hour. Un­der these con­di­tions houses top­ple, roof tiles punc­ture doors, iron rail­ings snap in two, and twenty-four-pounder can­nons re­lo­cate. And yet in the midst of this tur­moil, the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i> lived up to that say­ing of an ex­pert en­gi­neer: “A well-con­structed hull can defy any sea!” This sub­mersible was no re­sist­ing rock that waves could de­mol­ish; it was a steel spin­dle, obe­di­ently in mo­tion, with­out rig­ging or mast­ing, and able to brave their fury with im­punity.</p>
				<p>Mean­while I was care­fully ex­am­in­ing these un­leashed break­ers. They mea­sured up to fif­teen me­ters in height over a length of 150 to 175 me­ters, and the speed of their prop­a­ga­tion (half that of the wind) was fif­teen me­ters per sec­ond. Their vol­ume and power in­creased with the depth of the wa­ters. I then un­der­stood the role played by these waves, which trap air in their flanks and re­lease it in the depths of the sea where its oxy­gen brings life. Their ut­most pres­sure—it has been cal­cu­lated—can build to 3,000 kilo­grams on ev­ery square foot of sur­face they strike. It was such waves in the He­brides that repo­si­tioned a stone block weigh­ing 84,000 pounds. It was their rel­a­tives in the tidal wave on De­cem­ber 23, 1854, that top­pled part of the Ja­panese city of Tokyo, then went that same day at 700 kilo­me­ters per hour to break on the beaches of Amer­ica.</p>
				<p>After night­fall the storm grew in in­ten­sity. As in the 1860 cy­clone on Réu­nion Is­land, the barom­e­ter fell to 710 mil­lime­ters. At the close of day, I saw a big ship pass­ing on the hori­zon, strug­gling painfully. It lay to at half steam in an ef­fort to hold steady on the waves. It must have been a steamer on one of those lines out of New York to Liver­pool or Le Havre. It soon van­ished into the shad­ows.</p>
				<p>At ten o’clock in the evening, the skies caught on fire. The air was streaked with vi­o­lent flashes of light­ning. I couldn’t stand this bright­ness, but Cap­tain Nemo stared straight at it, as if to in­hale the spirit of the storm. A dread­ful noise filled the air, a com­pli­cated noise made up of the roar of crash­ing break­ers, the howl of the wind, claps of thun­der. The wind shifted to ev­ery point of the hori­zon, and the cy­clone left the east to re­turn there af­ter pass­ing through north, west, and south, mov­ing in the op­po­site di­rec­tion of re­volv­ing storms in the south­ern hemi­sphere.</p>
				<p>Oh, that Gulf Stream! It truly lives up to its nick­name, the Lord of Storms! All by it­self it cre­ates these fear­some cy­clones through the dif­fer­ence in tem­per­a­ture be­tween its cur­rents and the su­per­im­posed lay­ers of air.</p>
				<p>The rain was fol­lowed by a down­pour of fire. Dro­plets of wa­ter changed into ex­plod­ing tufts. You would have thought Cap­tain Nemo was court­ing a death wor­thy of him­self, seek­ing to be struck by light­ning. In one hideous pitch­ing move­ment, the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i> reared its steel spur into the air like a light­ning rod, and I saw long sparks shoot down it.</p>
				<p>Shat­tered, at the end of my strength, I slid flat on my belly to the hatch. I opened it and went be­low to the lounge. By then the storm had reached its max­i­mum in­ten­sity. It was im­pos­si­ble to stand up­right in­side the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i>.</p>
				<p>Cap­tain Nemo reen­tered near mid­night. I could hear the bal­last tanks fill­ing lit­tle by lit­tle, and the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i> sank gen­tly be­neath the sur­face of the waves.</p>
				<p>Through the lounge’s open win­dows, I saw large, fright­ened fish pass­ing like phan­toms in the fiery wa­ters. Some were struck by light­ning right be­fore my eyes!</p>
				<p>The <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i> kept de­scend­ing. I thought it would find calm again at fif­teen me­ters down. No. The up­per strata were too vi­o­lently ag­i­tated. It needed to sink to fifty me­ters, search­ing for a rest­ing place in the bow­els of the sea.</p>
				<p>But once there, what tran­quil­ity we found, what si­lence, what peace all around us! Who would have known that a dread­ful hur­ri­cane was then un­leashed on the sur­face of this ocean?</p>
			</section>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
