<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="en-US" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: http://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Chapter 23</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="part-1" epub:type="part">
			<section id="chapter-1-23" epub:type="chapter">
				<h3 epub:type="title">
					<span class="first-child" epub:type="z3998:roman">XXIII</span>
					<span class="epub-type-subtitle" lang="la" epub:type="subtitle" xml:lang="la">Aegri Somnia</span>
					<a class="epub-type-noteref" href="../text/endnotes.xhtml#note-11" id="note-11" epub:type="noteref">11</a>
				</h3>
				<p>The fol­low­ing day, Jan­uary 10, the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i> re­sumed its trav­els in mid­wa­ter but at a re­mark­able speed that I es­ti­mated to be at least thirty-five miles per hour. The pro­pel­ler was go­ing so fast I could nei­ther fol­low nor count its rev­o­lu­tions.</p>
				<p>I thought about how this mar­velous elec­tric force not only gave mo­tion, heat, and light to the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i> but even pro­tected it against out­side at­tack, trans­form­ing it into a sa­cred ark no pro­fane hand could touch with­out be­ing blasted; my won­der­ment was bound­less, and it went from the sub­mersible it­self to the en­gi­neer who had cre­ated it.</p>
				<p>We were trav­el­ing due west and on Jan­uary 11 we dou­bled Cape Wes­sel, lo­cated in lon­gi­tude 135° and lat­i­tude 10° north, the west­ern tip of the Gulf of Car­pen­taria. Reefs were still nu­mer­ous but more widely scat­tered and were fixed on the chart with the great­est ac­cu­racy. The <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i> eas­ily avoided the Money break­ers to port and the Vic­to­ria reefs to star­board, po­si­tioned at lon­gi­tude 130° on the tenth par­al­lel, which we went along rig­or­ously.</p>
				<p>On Jan­uary 13, ar­riv­ing in the Ti­mor Sea, Cap­tain Nemo raised the is­land of that name at lon­gi­tude 122°. This is­land, whose sur­face area mea­sures 1,625 square leagues, is gov­erned by ra­jahs. Th­ese aris­to­crats deem them­selves the sons of croc­o­diles, in other words, de­scen­dants with the most ex­alted ori­gins to which a hu­man be­ing can lay claim. Ac­cord­ingly, their scaly an­ces­tors in­fest the is­land’s rivers and are the sub­jects of spe­cial ven­er­a­tion. They are shel­tered, nur­tured, flat­tered, pam­pered, and of­fered a rit­ual diet of nu­bile maid­ens; and woe to the for­eigner who lifts a fin­ger against these sa­cred sauri­ans.</p>
				<p>But the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i> wanted noth­ing to do with these nasty an­i­mals. Ti­mor Is­land was vis­i­ble for barely an in­stant at noon while the chief of­fi­cer de­ter­mined his po­si­tion. I also caught only a glimpse of lit­tle Roti Is­land, part of this same group, whose women have a well-es­tab­lished rep­u­ta­tion for beauty in the Malaysian mar­ket­place.</p>
				<p>After our po­si­tion fix, the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i>’s lat­i­tude bear­ings were mod­u­lated to the south­west. Our prow pointed to the In­dian Ocean. Where would Cap­tain Nemo’s fan­cies take us? Would he head up to the shores of Asia? Would he pull nearer to the beaches of Europe? Un­likely choices for a man who avoided pop­u­lated ar­eas! So would he go down south? Would he dou­ble the Cape of Good Hope, then Cape Horn, and push on to the Antarc­tic pole? Fi­nally, would he re­turn to the seas of the Pa­cific, where his <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i> could nav­i­gate freely and eas­ily? Time would tell.</p>
				<p>After cruis­ing along the Cartier, Hiber­nia, Seringa­p­atam, and Scott reefs, the solid el­e­ment’s last ex­er­tions against the liq­uid el­e­ment, we were be­yond all sight of shore by Jan­uary 14. The <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i> slowed down in an odd man­ner, and very un­pre­dictable in its ways, it some­times swam in the midst of the wa­ters, some­times drifted on their sur­face.</p>
				<p>Dur­ing this phase of our voy­age, Cap­tain Nemo con­ducted in­ter­est­ing ex­per­i­ments on the dif­fer­ent tem­per­a­tures in var­i­ous strata of the sea. Un­der or­di­nary con­di­tions, such read­ings are ob­tained us­ing some pretty com­pli­cated in­stru­ments whose find­ings are du­bi­ous to say the least, whether they’re ther­mo­met­ric sound­ing lines, whose glass of­ten shat­ters un­der the wa­ter’s pres­sure, or those de­vices based on the vary­ing re­sis­tance of met­als to elec­tric cur­rents. The re­sults so ob­tained can’t be ad­e­quately dou­ble-checked. By con­trast, Cap­tain Nemo would seek the sea’s tem­per­a­ture by go­ing him­self into its depths, and when he placed his ther­mome­ter in con­tact with the var­i­ous lay­ers of liq­uid, he found the sought-for de­gree im­me­di­ately and with cer­tainty.</p>
				<p>And so, by load­ing up its bal­last tanks, or by sink­ing obliquely with its slant­ing fins, the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i> suc­ces­sively reached depths of 3,000, 4,000, 5,000, 7,000, 9,000, and 10,000 me­ters, and the ul­ti­mate con­clu­sion from these ex­per­i­ments was that, in all lat­i­tudes, the sea had a per­ma­nent tem­per­a­ture of 4.5° centi­grade at a depth of 1,000 me­ters.</p>
				<p>I watched these ex­per­i­ments with the most in­tense fas­ci­na­tion. Cap­tain Nemo brought a real pas­sion to them. I of­ten won­dered why he took these ob­ser­va­tions. Were they for the ben­e­fit of his fel­low man? It was un­likely, be­cause sooner or later his work would per­ish with him in some un­known sea! Un­less he in­tended the re­sults of his ex­per­i­ments for me. But that meant this strange voy­age of mine would come to an end, and no such end was in sight.</p>
				<p>Be that as it may, Cap­tain Nemo also in­tro­duced me to the dif­fer­ent data he had ob­tained on the rel­a­tive den­si­ties of the wa­ter in our globe’s chief seas. From this news I de­rived some per­sonal en­light­en­ment hav­ing noth­ing to do with sci­ence.</p>
				<p>It hap­pened the morn­ing of Jan­uary 15. The cap­tain, with whom I was strolling on the plat­form, asked me if I knew how salt wa­ter dif­fers in den­sity from sea to sea. I said no, adding that there was a lack of rig­or­ous sci­en­tific ob­ser­va­tions on this sub­ject.</p>
				<p>“I’ve taken such ob­ser­va­tions,” he told me, “and I can vouch for their re­li­a­bil­ity.”</p>
				<p>“Fine,” I replied, “but the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i> lives in a sep­a­rate world, and the se­crets of its sci­en­tists don’t make their way ashore.”</p>
				<p>“You’re right, pro­fes­sor,” he told me af­ter a few mo­ments of si­lence. “This is a sep­a­rate world. It’s as alien to the earth as the plan­ets ac­com­pa­ny­ing our globe around the sun, and we’ll never be­come fa­mil­iar with the work of sci­en­tists on Saturn or Jupiter. But since fate has linked our two lives, I can re­veal the re­sults of my ob­ser­va­tions to you.”</p>
				<p>“I’m all at­ten­tion, cap­tain.”</p>
				<p>“You’re aware, pro­fes­sor, that salt wa­ter is denser than fresh wa­ter, but this den­sity isn’t uni­form. In essence, if I rep­re­sent the den­sity of fresh wa­ter by 1.000, then I find 1.028 for the wa­ters of the At­lantic, 1.026 for the wa­ters of the Pa­cific, 1.030 for the wa­ters of the Mediter­ranean—”</p>
				<p>Aha, I thought, so he ven­tures into the Mediter­ranean?</p>
				<p>“—1.018 for the wa­ters of the Io­nian Sea, and 1.029 for the wa­ters of the Adri­atic.”</p>
				<p>As­suredly, the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i> didn’t avoid the heav­ily trav­eled seas of Europe, and from this in­sight I con­cluded that the ship would take us back—per­haps very soon—to more civ­i­lized shores. I ex­pected Ned Land to greet this news with un­feigned sat­is­fac­tion.</p>
				<p>For sev­eral days our work hours were spent in all sorts of ex­per­i­ments, on the de­gree of salin­ity in wa­ters of dif­fer­ent depths, or on their elec­tric prop­er­ties, col­oration, and trans­parency, and in ev­ery in­stance Cap­tain Nemo dis­played an in­ge­nu­ity equaled only by his gra­cious­ness to­ward me. Then I saw no more of him for some days and again lived on board in seclu­sion.</p>
				<p>On Jan­uary 16 the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i> seemed to have fallen asleep just a few me­ters be­neath the sur­face of the wa­ter. Its elec­tric equip­ment had been turned off, and the mo­tion­less pro­pel­ler let it ride with the waves. I as­sumed that the crew were busy with in­te­rior re­pairs, re­quired by the en­gine’s stren­u­ous me­chan­i­cal ac­tion.</p>
				<p>My com­pan­ions and I then wit­nessed an un­usual sight. The pan­els in the lounge were open, and since the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i>’s bea­con was off, a hazy dark­ness reigned in the midst of the wa­ters. Covered with heavy clouds, the stormy sky gave only the faintest light to the ocean’s up­per strata.</p>
				<p>I was ob­serv­ing the state of the sea un­der these con­di­tions, and even the largest fish were noth­ing more than ill-de­fined shad­ows, when the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i> was sud­denly trans­ferred into broad day­light. At first I thought the bea­con had gone back on and was cast­ing its elec­tric light into the liq­uid mass. I was mis­taken, and af­ter a hasty ex­am­i­na­tion I dis­cov­ered my er­ror.</p>
				<p>The <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i> had drifted into the midst of some phos­pho­res­cent strata, which, in this dark­ness, came off as pos­i­tively daz­zling. This ef­fect was caused by myr­i­ads of tiny, lu­mi­nous an­i­mals whose bright­ness in­creased when they glided over the metal hull of our sub­mersible. In the midst of these lu­mi­nous sheets of wa­ter, I then glimpsed flashes of light, like those seen in­side a blaz­ing fur­nace from streams of molten lead or from masses of metal brought to a white heat—flashes so in­tense that cer­tain ar­eas of the light be­came shad­ows by com­par­i­son, in a fiery set­ting from which ev­ery shadow should seem­ingly have been ban­ished. No, this was no longer the calm emis­sion of our usual light­ing! This light throbbed with un­prece­dented vigor and ac­tiv­ity! You sensed that it was alive!</p>
				<p>In essence, it was a clus­ter of count­less open-sea <i epub:type="z3998:taxonomy">in­fu­so­ria</i>, of <i epub:type="z3998:taxonomy">noc­tiluca</i> an eighth of an inch wide, ac­tual glob­ules of trans­par­ent jelly equipped with a thread­like ten­ta­cle, up to 25,000 of which have been counted in thirty cu­bic cen­time­ters of wa­ter. And the power of their light was in­creased by those glim­mers unique to medusas, starfish, com­mon jel­ly­fish, an­gel-wing clams, and other phos­pho­res­cent zoophytes, which were sat­u­rated with grease from or­ganic mat­ter de­com­posed by the sea, and per­haps with mu­cus se­creted by fish.</p>
				<p>For sev­eral hours the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i> drifted in this bril­liant tide, and our won­der­ment grew when we saw huge ma­rine an­i­mals ca­vort­ing in it, like the fire-dwelling sala­man­ders of myth. In the midst of these flames that didn’t burn, I could see swift, el­e­gant por­poises, the tire­less pranksters of the seas, and sail­fish three me­ters long, those shrewd her­alds of hur­ri­canes, whose fear­some broadswords some­times banged against the lounge win­dow. Then smaller fish ap­peared: mis­cel­la­neous trig­ger­fish, leather jacks, uni­corn­fish, and a hun­dred oth­ers that left stripes on this lu­mi­nous at­mos­phere in their course.</p>
				<p>Some magic lay be­hind this daz­zling sight! Per­haps some at­mo­spheric con­di­tion had in­ten­si­fied this phe­nom­e­non? Per­haps a storm had been un­leashed on the sur­face of the waves? But only a few me­ters down, the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i> felt no tem­pest’s fury, and the ship rocked peace­fully in the midst of the calm wa­ters.</p>
				<p>And so it went, some new won­der con­stantly de­light­ing us. Con­seil ob­served and clas­si­fied his zoophytes, ar­tic­u­lates, mol­lusks, and fish. The days passed quickly, and I no longer kept track of them. Ned, as usual, kept look­ing for changes of pace from our stan­dard fare. Like ac­tual snails, we were at home in our shell, and I can vouch that it’s easy to turn into a full-fledged snail.</p>
				<p>So this way of liv­ing be­gan to seem sim­ple and nat­u­ral to us, and we no longer en­vi­sioned a dif­fer­ent life­style on the sur­face of the planet earth, when some­thing hap­pened to re­mind us of our strange cir­cum­stances.</p>
				<p>On Jan­uary 18 the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i> lay in lon­gi­tude 105° and lat­i­tude 15° south. The weather was threat­en­ing, the sea rough and bil­lowy. The wind was blow­ing a strong gust from the east. The barom­e­ter, which had been fall­ing for some days, fore­cast an ap­proach­ing strug­gle of the el­e­ments.</p>
				<p>I had climbed onto the plat­form just as the chief of­fi­cer was tak­ing his read­ings of hour an­gles. Out of habit I waited for him to pro­nounce his daily phrase. But that day it was re­placed by a dif­fer­ent phrase, just as in­com­pre­hen­si­ble. Al­most at once I saw Cap­tain Nemo ap­pear, lift his spy­glass, and in­spect the hori­zon.</p>
				<p>For some min­utes the cap­tain stood mo­tion­less, rooted to the spot con­tained within the field of his lens. Then he low­ered his spy­glass and ex­changed about ten words with his chief of­fi­cer. The lat­ter seemed to be in the grip of an ex­cite­ment he tried in vain to con­trol. More in com­mand of him­self, Cap­tain Nemo re­mained cool. Fur­ther­more, he seemed to be rais­ing cer­tain ob­jec­tions that his chief of­fi­cer kept an­swer­ing with flat as­sur­ances. At least that’s what I gath­ered from their dif­fer­ences in tone and ges­ture.</p>
				<p>As for me, I stared in­dus­tri­ously in the di­rec­tion un­der ob­ser­va­tion but with­out spot­ting a thing. Sky and wa­ter merged into a per­fectly clean hori­zon line.</p>
				<p>Mean­while Cap­tain Nemo strolled from one end of the plat­form to the other, not glanc­ing at me, per­haps not even see­ing me. His step was firm but less reg­u­lar than usual. Some­times he would stop, cross his arms over his chest, and ob­serve the sea. What could he be look­ing for over that im­mense ex­panse? By then the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i> lay hun­dreds of miles from the near­est coast!</p>
				<p>The chief of­fi­cer kept lift­ing his spy­glass and stub­bornly ex­am­in­ing the hori­zon, walk­ing up and down, stamp­ing his foot, in his ner­vous ag­i­ta­tion a sharp con­trast to his su­pe­rior.</p>
				<p>But this mys­tery would in­evitably be cleared up, and soon, be­cause Cap­tain Nemo gave or­ders to in­crease speed; at once the en­gine stepped up its drive power, set­ting the pro­pel­ler in swifter ro­ta­tion.</p>
				<p>Just then the chief of­fi­cer drew the cap­tain’s at­ten­tion anew. The lat­ter in­ter­rupted his strolling and aimed his spy­glass at the point in­di­cated. He ob­served it a good while. As for me, deeply puz­zled, I went be­low to the lounge and brought back an ex­cel­lent long-range tele­scope I ha­bit­u­ally used. Lean­ing my el­bows on the bea­con hous­ing, which jut­ted from the stern of the plat­form, I got set to scour that whole stretch of sky and sea.</p>
				<p>But no sooner had I peered into the eye­piece than the in­stru­ment was snatched from my hands.</p>
				<p>I spun around. Cap­tain Nemo was stand­ing be­fore me, but I al­most didn’t rec­og­nize him. His fa­cial fea­tures were trans­fig­ured. Gleam­ing with dark fire, his eyes had shrunk be­neath his frown­ing brow. His teeth were half bared. His rigid body, clenched fists, and head drawn be­tween his shoul­ders, all at­tested to a fierce hate breath­ing from ev­ery pore. He didn’t move. My spy­glass fell from his hand and rolled at his feet.</p>
				<p>Had I ac­ci­den­tally caused these symp­toms of anger? Did this in­com­pre­hen­si­ble in­di­vid­ual think I had de­tected some se­cret for­bid­den to guests on the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i>?</p>
				<p>No! I wasn’t the sub­ject of his hate be­cause he wasn’t even look­ing at me; his eyes stayed stub­bornly fo­cused on that in­scrutable point of the hori­zon.</p>
				<p>Fi­nally Cap­tain Nemo re­gained his self-con­trol. His fa­cial ap­pear­ance, so pro­foundly changed, now re­sumed its usual calm. He ad­dressed a few words to his chief of­fi­cer in their strange lan­guage, then he turned to me:</p>
				<p>“Pro­fes­sor Aron­nax,” he told me in a tone of some ur­gency, “I ask that you now honor one of the bind­ing agree­ments be­tween us.”</p>
				<p>“Which one, cap­tain?”</p>
				<p>“You and your com­pan­ions must be placed in con­fine­ment un­til I see fit to set you free.”</p>
				<p>“You’re in com­mand,” I an­swered, gap­ing at him. “But may I ad­dress a ques­tion to you?”</p>
				<p>“You may not, sir.”</p>
				<p>After that, I stopped ob­ject­ing and started obey­ing, since re­sis­tance was use­less.</p>
				<p>I went be­low to the cabin oc­cu­pied by Ned Land and Con­seil, and I in­formed them of the cap­tain’s de­ci­sion. I’ll let the reader de­cide how this news was re­ceived by the Cana­dian. In any case, there was no time for ex­pla­na­tions. Four crew­men were wait­ing at the door, and they led us to the cell where we had spent our first night aboard the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i>.</p>
				<p>Ned Land tried to lodge a com­plaint, but the only an­swer he got was a door shut in his face.</p>
				<p>“Will mas­ter tell me what this means?” Con­seil asked me.</p>
				<p>I told my com­pan­ions what had hap­pened. They were as as­ton­ished as I was, but no wiser.</p>
				<p>Then I sank into deep spec­u­la­tion, and Cap­tain Nemo’s strange fa­cial seizure kept haunt­ing me. I was in­ca­pable of con­nect­ing two ideas in log­i­cal or­der, and I had strayed into the most ab­surd hy­pothe­ses, when I was snapped out of my men­tal strug­gles by these words from Ned Land:</p>
				<p>“Well, look here! Lunch is served!”</p>
				<p>In­deed, the ta­ble had been laid. Ap­par­ently Cap­tain Nemo had given this or­der at the same time he com­manded the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i> to pick up speed.</p>
				<p>“Will mas­ter al­low me to make him a rec­om­men­da­tion?” Con­seil asked me.</p>
				<p>“Yes, my boy,” I replied.</p>
				<p>“Well, mas­ter needs to eat his lunch! It’s pru­dent, be­cause we have no idea what the fu­ture holds.”</p>
				<p>“You’re right, Con­seil.”</p>
				<p>“Un­for­tu­nately,” Ned Land said, “they’ve only given us the stan­dard menu.”</p>
				<p>“Ned my friend,” Con­seil an­swered, “what would you say if they’d given us no lunch at all?”</p>
				<p>This dose of san­ity cut the har­pooner’s com­plaints clean off.</p>
				<p>We sat down at the ta­ble. Our meal pro­ceeded pretty much in si­lence. I ate very lit­tle. Con­seil, ev­er­last­ingly pru­dent, “force-fed” him­self; and de­spite the menu, Ned Land didn’t waste a bite. Then, lunch over, each of us propped him­self in a cor­ner.</p>
				<p>Just then the lu­mi­nous globe light­ing our cell went out, leav­ing us in pro­found dark­ness. Ned Land soon dozed off, and to my as­ton­ish­ment, Con­seil also fell into a heavy slum­ber. I was won­der­ing what could have caused this ur­gent need for sleep, when I felt a dense tor­por sat­u­rate my brain. I tried to keep my eyes open, but they closed in spite of me. I was in the grip of an­guished hal­lu­ci­na­tions. Ob­vi­ously some sleep-in­duc­ing sub­stance had been laced into the food we’d just eaten! So im­pris­on­ment wasn’t enough to con­ceal Cap­tain Nemo’s plans from us—sleep was needed as well!</p>
				<p>Then I heard the hatches close. The sea’s un­du­la­tions, which had been cre­at­ing a gen­tle rock­ing mo­tion, now ceased. Had the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i> left the sur­face of the ocean? Was it reen­ter­ing the mo­tion­less strata deep in the sea?</p>
				<p>I tried to fight off this drowsi­ness. It was im­pos­si­ble. My breath­ing grew weaker. I felt a mor­tal chill freeze my dull, nearly par­a­lyzed limbs. Like lit­tle domes of lead, my lids fell over my eyes. I couldn’t raise them. A mor­bid sleep, full of hal­lu­ci­na­tions, seized my whole be­ing. Then the vi­sions dis­ap­peared and left me in ut­ter obliv­ion.</p>
			</section>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
