<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="en-US" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: http://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Chapter 7</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="part-2" epub:type="part">
			<section id="chapter-2-7" epub:type="chapter">
				<h3 epub:type="title">
					<span class="first-child" epub:type="z3998:roman">VII</span>
					<span class="epub-type-subtitle" epub:type="subtitle">The Mediterranean in Forty-Eight Hours</span>
				</h3>
				<p>The Mediter­ranean, your ideal blue sea: to Greeks sim­ply “the sea,” to He­brews “the great sea,” to Ro­mans <i lang="la" xml:lang="la">mare nos­trum</i>.<a class="epub-type-noteref" href="../text/endnotes.xhtml#note-15" id="note-15" epub:type="noteref">15</a> Bordered by or­ange trees, aloes, cac­tus, and mar­itime pine trees, per­fumed with the scent of myr­tle, framed by rugged moun­tains, sat­u­rated with clean, trans­par­ent air but con­tin­u­ously un­der con­struc­tion by fires in the earth, this sea is a gen­uine bat­tle­field where Nep­tune and Pluto still strug­gle for world dom­i­na­tion. Here on these beaches and wa­ters, says the French his­to­rian Michelet, a man is re­vived by one of the most in­vig­o­rat­ing cli­mates in the world.</p>
				<p>But as beau­ti­ful as it was, I could get only a quick look at this basin whose sur­face area com­prises 2,000,000 square kilo­me­ters. Even Cap­tain Nemo’s per­sonal in­sights were de­nied me, be­cause that mys­ti­fy­ing in­di­vid­ual didn’t ap­pear one sin­gle time dur­ing our high-speed cross­ing. I es­ti­mate that the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i> cov­ered a track of some 600 leagues un­der the waves of this sea, and this voy­age was ac­com­plished in just twenty-four hours times two. Depart­ing from the wa­ter­ways of Greece on the morn­ing of Fe­bru­ary 16, we cleared the Strait of Gi­bral­tar by sun­rise on the 18th.</p>
				<p>It was ob­vi­ous to me that this Mediter­ranean, pinned in the mid­dle of those shores he wanted to avoid, gave Cap­tain Nemo no plea­sure. Its waves and breezes brought back too many mem­o­ries, if not too many re­grets. Here he no longer had the ease of move­ment and free­dom of ma­neu­ver that the oceans al­lowed him, and his <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i> felt cramped so close to the coasts of both Africa and Europe.</p>
				<p>Ac­cord­ingly, our speed was twenty-five miles (that is, twelve four-kilo­me­ter leagues) per hour. Need­less to say, Ned Land had to give up his es­cape plans, much to his dis­tress. Swept along at the rate of twelve to thir­teen me­ters per sec­ond, he could hardly make use of the skiff. Leav­ing the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i> un­der these con­di­tions would have been like jump­ing off a train rac­ing at this speed, a rash move if there ever was one. More­over, to re­new our air sup­ply, the sub­mersible rose to the sur­face of the waves only at night, and re­ly­ing solely on com­pass and log, it steered by dead reck­on­ing.</p>
				<p>In­side the Mediter­ranean, then, I could catch no more of its fast-pass­ing scenery than a trav­eler might see from an ex­press train; in other words, I could view only the dis­tant hori­zons be­cause the fore­grounds flashed by like light­ning. But Con­seil and I were able to ob­serve those Mediter­ranean fish whose pow­er­ful fins kept pace for a while in the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i>’s wa­ters. We stayed on watch be­fore the lounge win­dows, and our notes en­able me to re­con­struct, in a few words, the ichthy­ol­ogy of this sea.</p>
				<p>Among the var­i­ous fish in­hab­it­ing it, some I viewed, oth­ers I glimpsed, and the rest I missed com­pletely be­cause of the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i>’s speed. Kindly al­low me to sort them out us­ing this whim­si­cal sys­tem of clas­si­fi­ca­tion. It will at least con­vey the quick­ness of my ob­ser­va­tions.</p>
				<p>In the midst of the wa­tery mass, brightly lit by our elec­tric beams, there snaked past those one-me­ter lam­preys that are com­mon to nearly ev­ery clime. A type of ray from the genus <i epub:type="z3998:taxonomy">Oxyrhynchus</i>, five feet wide, had a white belly with a spot­ted, ash-gray back and was car­ried along by the cur­rents like a huge, wide-open shawl. Other rays passed by so quickly I couldn’t tell if they de­served that name “ea­gle ray” coined by the an­cient Greeks, or those des­ig­na­tions of “rat ray,” “bat ray,” and “toad ray” that mod­ern fish­er­men have in­flicted on them. Dog­fish known as topes, twelve feet long and es­pe­cially feared by divers, were rac­ing with each other. Look­ing like big bluish shad­ows, thresher sharks went by, eight feet long and gifted with an ex­tremely acute sense of smell. Do­ra­dos from the genus <i epub:type="z3998:taxonomy">Sparus</i>, some mea­sur­ing up to thir­teen decime­ters, ap­peared in sil­ver and azure cos­tumes en­cir­cled with rib­bons, which con­trasted with the dark color of their fins; fish sa­cred to the god­dess Venus, their eyes set in brows of gold; a valu­able species that pa­tron­izes all wa­ters fresh or salt, equally at home in rivers, lakes, and oceans, liv­ing in ev­ery clime, tol­er­at­ing any tem­per­a­ture, their line dat­ing back to pre­his­toric times on this earth yet pre­serv­ing all its beauty from those far-off days. Mag­nif­i­cent stur­geons, nine to ten me­ters long and ex­tremely fast, banged their pow­er­ful tails against the glass of our pan­els, show­ing bluish backs with small brown spots; they re­sem­ble sharks, with­out equal­ing their strength, and are en­coun­tered in ev­ery sea; in the spring they de­light in swim­ming up the great rivers, fight­ing the cur­rents of the Volga, Danube, Po, Rhine, Loire, and Oder, while feed­ing on her­ring, mack­erel, salmon, and cod­fish; al­though they be­long to the class of car­ti­lagi­nous fish, they rate as a del­i­cacy; they’re eaten fresh, dried, mar­i­nated, or salt-pre­served, and in olden times they were borne in tri­umph to the ta­ble of the Ro­man epi­cure Lu­cul­lus.</p>
				<p>But when­ever the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i> drew near the sur­face, those denizens of the Mediter­ranean I could ob­serve most pro­duc­tively be­longed to the sixty-third genus of bony fish. Th­ese were tuna from the genus <i epub:type="z3998:taxonomy">Scomber</i>, blue-black on top, sil­ver on the belly ar­mor, their dor­sal stripes giv­ing off a golden gleam. They are said to fol­low ships in search of re­fresh­ing shade from the hot trop­i­cal sun, and they did just that with the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i>, as they had once done with the ves­sels of the Count de La Pérouse. For long hours they com­peted in speed with our sub­mersible. I couldn’t stop mar­veling at these an­i­mals so per­fectly cut out for rac­ing, their heads small, their bod­ies sleek, spin­dle-shaped, and in some cases over three me­ters long, their pec­toral fins gifted with re­mark­able strength, their cau­dal fins forked. Like cer­tain flocks of birds, whose speed they equal, these tuna swim in tri­an­gle for­ma­tion, which prompted the an­cients to say they’d boned up on ge­om­e­try and mil­i­tary strat­egy. And yet they can’t es­cape the Provençal fish­er­men, who prize them as highly as did the an­cient in­hab­i­tants of Turkey and Italy; and these valu­able an­i­mals, as obliv­i­ous as if they were deaf and blind, leap right into the Mar­seilles tuna nets and per­ish by the thou­sands.</p>
				<p>Just for the record, I’ll men­tion those Mediter­ranean fish that Con­seil and I barely glimpsed. There were whitish eels of the species <i epub:type="z3998:taxonomy">Gym­no­tus fas­cia­tus</i> that passed like elu­sive wisps of steam, con­ger eels three to four me­ters long that were tricked out in green, blue, and yel­low, three-foot hake with a liver that makes a dainty morsel, worm­fish drift­ing like thin sea­weed, sea robins that po­ets call lyre­fish and sea­men pipers and whose snouts have two jagged tri­an­gu­lar plates shaped like old Homer’s lyre, swal­low­fish swim­ming as fast as the bird they’re named af­ter, red­headed groupers whose dor­sal fins are trimmed with fil­a­ments, some shad (spot­ted with black, gray, brown, blue, yel­low, and green) that ac­tu­ally re­spond to tin­kling hand­bells, splen­did di­a­mond-shaped tur­bot that were like aquatic pheas­ants with yel­low­ish fins stip­pled in brown and the left top­side mostly mar­bled in brown and yel­low, fi­nally schools of won­der­ful red mul­let, real oceanic birds of par­adise that an­cient Ro­mans bought for as much as 10,000 ses­ter­ces apiece, and which they killed at the ta­ble, so they could heart­lessly watch it change color from cinnabar red when alive to pal­lid white when dead.</p>
				<p>And as for other fish com­mon to the At­lantic and Mediter­ranean, I was un­able to ob­serve mi­ralets, trig­ger­fish, puffers, sea­horses, jew­elfish, trum­pet­fish, blennies, gray mul­let, wrasse, smelt, fly­ing fish, an­chovies, sea bream, por­gies, garfish, or any of the chief rep­re­sen­ta­tives of the or­der <i epub:type="z3998:taxonomy">Pleu­ronecta</i>, such as sole, floun­der, plaice, dab, and brill, sim­ply be­cause of the dizzy­ing speed with which the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i> hus­tled through these op­u­lent wa­ters.</p>
				<p>As for ma­rine mam­mals, on pass­ing by the mouth of the Adri­atic Sea, I thought I rec­og­nized two or three sperm whales equipped with the sin­gle dor­sal fin de­not­ing the genus <i epub:type="z3998:taxonomy">Phy­seter</i>, some pi­lot whales from the genus <i epub:type="z3998:taxonomy">Glo­bi­cephalus</i> ex­clu­sive to the Mediter­ranean, the forepart of the head striped with small dis­tinct lines, and also a dozen seals with white bel­lies and black coats, known by the name monk seals and just as solemn as if they were three-me­ter Do­mini­cans.</p>
				<p>For his part, Con­seil thought he spot­ted a tur­tle six feet wide and adorned with three pro­trud­ing ridges that ran length­wise. I was sorry to miss this rep­tile, be­cause from Con­seil’s de­scrip­tion, I be­lieve I rec­og­nized the leatherback tur­tle, a pretty rare species. For my part, I noted only some log­ger­head tur­tles with long cara­paces.</p>
				<p>As for zoophytes, for a few mo­ments I was able to mar­vel at a won­der­ful, or­ange-hued hy­dra from the genus <i epub:type="z3998:taxonomy">Ga­le­o­laria</i> that clung to the glass of our port panel; it con­sisted of a long, lean fil­a­ment that spread out into count­less branches and ended in the most del­i­cate lace ever spun by the fol­low­ers of Arachne. Un­for­tu­nately I couldn’t fish up this won­der­ful spec­i­men, and surely no other Mediter­ranean zoophytes would have been of­fered to my gaze, if, on the evening of the 16th, the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i> hadn’t slowed down in an odd fash­ion. This was the sit­u­a­tion.</p>
				<p>By then we were pass­ing be­tween Si­cily and the coast of Tu­nisia. In the cramped space be­tween Cape Bon and the Strait of Messina, the sea bot­tom rises al­most all at once. It forms an ac­tual ridge with only sev­en­teen me­ters of wa­ter re­main­ing above it, while the depth on ei­ther side is 170 me­ters. Con­se­quently, the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i> had to ma­neu­ver with cau­tion so as not to bump into this un­der­wa­ter bar­rier.</p>
				<p>I showed Con­seil the po­si­tion of this long reef on our chart of the Mediter­ranean.</p>
				<p>“But with all due re­spect to mas­ter,” Con­seil ven­tured to ob­serve, “it’s like an ac­tual isth­mus con­nect­ing Europe to Africa.”</p>
				<p>“Yes, my boy,” I replied, “it cuts across the whole Strait of Si­cily, and Smith’s sound­ings prove that in the past, these two con­ti­nents were gen­uinely con­nected be­tween Cape Boeo and Cape Fa­rina.”</p>
				<p>“I can eas­ily be­lieve it,” Con­seil said.</p>
				<p>“I might add,” I went on, “that there’s a sim­i­lar bar­rier be­tween Gi­bral­tar and Ceuta, and in pre­his­toric times it closed off the Mediter­ranean com­pletely.”</p>
				<p>“Gra­cious!” Con­seil put in. “Sup­pose one day some vol­canic up­heaval raises these two bar­ri­ers back above the waves!”</p>
				<p>“That’s most un­likely, Con­seil.”</p>
				<p>“If mas­ter will al­low me to fin­ish, I mean that if this phe­nom­e­non oc­curs, it might prove dis­tress­ing to Mr. de Lesseps, who has gone to such pains to cut through his isth­mus!”</p>
				<p>“Agreed, but I re­peat, Con­seil: such a phe­nom­e­non won’t oc­cur. The in­ten­sity of these un­der­ground forces con­tin­ues to di­min­ish. Vol­ca­noes were quite nu­mer­ous in the world’s early days, but they’re go­ing ex­tinct one by one; the heat in­side the earth is grow­ing weaker, the tem­per­a­ture in the globe’s lower strata is cool­ing ap­pre­cia­bly ev­ery cen­tury, and to our globe’s detri­ment, be­cause its heat is its life.”</p>
				<p>“But the sun—”</p>
				<p>“The sun isn’t enough, Con­seil. Can it re­store heat to a corpse?”</p>
				<p>“Not that I’ve heard.”</p>
				<p>“Well, my friend, some­day the earth will be just such a cold corpse. Like the moon, which long ago lost its vi­tal heat, our globe will be­come life­less and un­liv­able.”</p>
				<p>“In how many cen­turies?” Con­seil asked.</p>
				<p>“In hun­dreds of thou­sands of years, my boy.”</p>
				<p>“Then we have am­ple time to fin­ish our voy­age,” Con­seil replied, “if Ned Land doesn’t mess things up!”</p>
				<p>Thus re­as­sured, Con­seil went back to study­ing the shal­lows that the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i> was skim­ming at mod­er­ate speed.</p>
				<p>On the rocky, vol­canic seafloor, there bloomed quite a col­lec­tion of mov­ing flora: sponges, sea cu­cum­bers, jel­ly­fish called sea goose­ber­ries that were adorned with red­dish ten­drils and gave off a sub­tle phos­pho­res­cence, mem­bers of the genus <i epub:type="z3998:taxonomy">Beroe</i> that are com­monly known by the name melon jel­ly­fish and are bathed in the shim­mer of the whole so­lar spec­trum, free-swim­ming crinoids one me­ter wide that red­dened the wa­ters with their crim­son hue, tree­like bas­ket stars of the great­est beauty, sea fans from the genus <i epub:type="z3998:taxonomy">Pavonacea</i> with long stems, nu­mer­ous ed­i­ble sea urchins of var­i­ous species, plus green sea anemones with a gray­ish trunk and a brown disk lost be­neath the olive-col­ored tresses of their ten­ta­cles.</p>
				<p>Con­seil kept es­pe­cially busy ob­serv­ing mol­lusks and ar­tic­u­lates, and al­though his cat­a­log is a lit­tle dry, I wouldn’t want to wrong the gal­lant lad by leav­ing out his per­sonal ob­ser­va­tions.</p>
				<p>From the branch <i epub:type="z3998:taxonomy">Mol­lusca</i>, he men­tions nu­mer­ous comb-shaped scal­lops, hooflike spiny oys­ters piled on top of each other, tri­an­gu­lar co­quina, three-pronged glass snails with yel­low fins and trans­par­ent shells, or­ange snails from the genus <i epub:type="z3998:taxonomy">Pleu­ro­branchus</i> that looked like eggs spot­ted or speck­led with green­ish dots, mem­bers of the genus <i epub:type="z3998:taxonomy">Aplysia</i> also known by the name sea hares, other sea hares from the genus <i epub:type="z3998:taxonomy">Do­la­bella</i>, plump pa­per-bub­ble shells, um­brella shells ex­clu­sive to the Mediter­ranean, abalone whose shell pro­duces a mother-of-pearl much in de­mand, pil­grim scal­lops, sad­dle shells that din­ers in the French prov­ince of Langue­doc are said to like bet­ter than oys­ters, some of those cock­leshells so dear to the cit­i­zens of Mar­seilles, fat white venus shells that are among the clams so abun­dant off the coasts of North Amer­ica and eaten in such quan­ti­ties by New York­ers, var­i­ously col­ored comb shells with gill cov­ers, bur­row­ing date mus­sels with a pep­pery fla­vor I rel­ish, fur­rowed heart cock­les whose shells have ri­b­like ridges on their arch­ing sum­mits, tri­ton shells pocked with scar­let bumps, car­ni­aira snails with back­ward-curv­ing tips that make them re­sem­ble flimsy gon­do­las, crowned fer­ola snails, at­lanta snails with spi­ral shells, gray nudi­branchs from the genus <i epub:type="z3998:taxonomy">Tethys</i> that were spot­ted with white and cov­ered by fringed man­tles, nudi­branchs from the sub­or­der <i epub:type="z3998:taxonomy">Eolidea</i> that looked like small slugs, sea but­ter­flies crawl­ing on their backs, seashells from the genus <i epub:type="z3998:taxonomy">Auric­ula</i> in­clud­ing the oval-shaped <i epub:type="z3998:taxonomy">Auric­ula myoso­tis</i>, tan wentle­trap snails, com­mon peri­win­kles, vi­o­let snails, cin­eraira snails, rock bor­ers, ear shells, cabo­chon snails, pan­dora shells, etc.</p>
				<p>As for the ar­tic­u­lates, in his notes Con­seil has very ap­pro­pri­ately di­vided them into six classes, three of which be­long to the ma­rine world. Th­ese classes are the <i epub:type="z3998:taxonomy">Crus­tacea</i>, <i epub:type="z3998:taxonomy">Cir­ri­pedia</i>, and <i epub:type="z3998:taxonomy">An­nel­ida</i>.</p>
				<p>Crus­taceans are sub­di­vided into nine or­ders, and the first of these con­sists of the de­capods, in other words, an­i­mals whose head and tho­rax are usu­ally fused, whose cheek-and-mouth mech­a­nism is made up of sev­eral pairs of ap­pendages, and whose tho­rax has four, five, or six pairs of walk­ing legs. Con­seil used the meth­ods of our men­tor Pro­fes­sor Milne-Ed­wards, who puts the de­capods in three di­vi­sions: <i epub:type="z3998:taxonomy">Brachyura</i>, <i epub:type="z3998:taxonomy">Macrura</i>, and <i epub:type="z3998:taxonomy">Ano­mura</i>. Th­ese names may look a tad fierce, but they’re ac­cu­rate and ap­pro­pri­ate. Among the <i epub:type="z3998:taxonomy">Brachyura</i>, Con­seil men­tions some aman­thia crabs whose fronts were armed with two big di­verg­ing tips, those in­achus scor­pi­ons that—lord knows why—sym­bol­ized wis­dom to the an­cient Greeks, spi­der crabs of the <i epub:type="z3998:taxonomy">massena</i> and <i epub:type="z3998:taxonomy">spin­i­mane</i> va­ri­eties that had prob­a­bly gone astray in these shal­lows be­cause they usu­ally live in the lower depths, xan­thid crabs, pilumna crabs, rhom­boid crabs, gran­u­lar box crabs (easy on the di­ges­tion, as Con­seil ven­tured to ob­serve), tooth­less masked crabs, ebalia crabs, cy­mopo­lia crabs, woolly-handed crabs, etc. Among the <i epub:type="z3998:taxonomy">Macrura</i> (which are sub­di­vided into five fam­i­lies: hard­shells, bur­row­ers, cray­fish, prawns, and ghost crabs) Con­seil men­tions some com­mon spiny lob­sters whose fe­males sup­ply a meat highly prized, slip­per lob­sters or com­mon shrimp, wa­ter­side gebia shrimp, and all sorts of ed­i­ble species, but he says noth­ing of the cray­fish sub­di­vi­sion that in­cludes the true lob­ster, be­cause spiny lob­sters are the only type in the Mediter­ranean. Fi­nally, among the <i epub:type="z3998:taxonomy">Ano­mura</i>, he saw com­mon drocina crabs dwelling in­side what­ever aban­doned seashells they could take over, ho­mola crabs with spiny fronts, her­mit crabs, hairy porce­lain crabs, etc.</p>
				<p>There Con­seil’s work came to a halt. He didn’t have time to fin­ish off the class <i epub:type="z3998:taxonomy">Crus­tacea</i> through an ex­am­i­na­tion of its <i epub:type="z3998:taxonomy">stom­atopods</i>, <i epub:type="z3998:taxonomy">am­phipods</i>, <i epub:type="z3998:taxonomy">ho­mopods</i>, <i epub:type="z3998:taxonomy">isopods</i>, <i epub:type="z3998:taxonomy">trilo­bites</i>, <i epub:type="z3998:taxonomy">bran­chiopods</i>, <i epub:type="z3998:taxonomy">os­tra­cods</i>, and <i epub:type="z3998:taxonomy">en­to­mostraceans</i>. And in or­der to com­plete his study of ma­rine ar­tic­u­lates, he needed to men­tion the class <i epub:type="z3998:taxonomy">Cir­ri­pedia</i>, which con­tains wa­ter fleas and carp lice, plus the class <i epub:type="z3998:taxonomy">An­nel­ida</i>, which he would have di­vided with­out fail into <i epub:type="z3998:taxonomy">tubifex</i> worms and <i epub:type="z3998:taxonomy">dorsibranchian</i> worms. But hav­ing gone past the shal­lows of the Strait of Si­cily, the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i> re­sumed its usual deep-wa­ter speed. From then on, no more mol­lusks, no more zoophytes, no more ar­tic­u­lates. Just a few large fish sweep­ing by like shad­ows.</p>
				<p>Dur­ing the night of Fe­bru­ary 16–17, we en­tered the sec­ond Mediter­ranean basin, whose max­i­mum depth we found at 3,000 me­ters. The <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i>, driven down­ward by its pro­pel­ler and slant­ing fins, de­scended to the low­est strata of this sea.</p>
				<p>There, in place of nat­u­ral won­ders, the wa­tery mass of­fered some thrilling and dread­ful scenes to my eyes. In essence, we were then cross­ing that part of the whole Mediter­ranean so fer­tile in ca­su­al­ties. From the coast of Al­giers to the beaches of Provence, how many ships have wrecked, how many ves­sels have van­ished! Com­pared to the vast liq­uid plains of the Pa­cific, the Mediter­ranean is a mere lake, but it’s an un­pre­dictable lake with fickle waves, to­day kindly and af­fec­tion­ate to those frail sin­gle-mas­ters drift­ing be­tween a dou­ble ul­tra­ma­rine of sky and wa­ter, to­mor­row bad-tem­pered and tur­bu­lent, ag­i­tated by the winds, de­mol­ish­ing the strong­est ships be­neath sud­den waves that smash down with a head­long wal­lop.</p>
				<p>So, in our swift cruise through these deep strata, how many ves­sels I saw ly­ing on the seafloor, some al­ready caked with coral, oth­ers clad only in a layer of rust, plus an­chors, can­nons, shells, iron fit­tings, pro­pel­ler blades, parts of en­gines, cracked cylin­ders, staved-in boil­ers, then hulls float­ing in mid­wa­ter, here up­right, there over­turned.</p>
				<p>Some of these wrecked ships had per­ished in col­li­sions, oth­ers from hit­ting gran­ite reefs. I saw a few that had sunk straight down, their mast­ing still up­right, their rig­ging stiff­ened by the wa­ter. They looked like they were at an­chor by some im­mense, open, off­shore moor­ing where they were wait­ing for their de­par­ture time. When the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i> passed be­tween them, cov­er­ing them with sheets of elec­tric­ity, they seemed ready to salute us with their col­ors and send us their se­rial num­bers! But no, noth­ing but si­lence and death filled this field of catas­tro­phes!</p>
				<p>I ob­served that these Mediter­ranean depths be­came more and more clut­tered with such grue­some wreck­age as the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i> drew nearer to the Strait of Gi­bral­tar. By then the shores of Africa and Europe were con­verg­ing, and in this nar­row space col­li­sions were com­mon­place. There I saw nu­mer­ous iron un­der­sides, the phan­tas­magoric ru­ins of steam­ers, some ly­ing down, oth­ers rear­ing up like fear­some an­i­mals. One of these boats made a dread­ful first im­pres­sion: sides torn open, fun­nel bent, pad­dle wheels stripped to the mount­ings, rud­der sep­a­rated from the stern­post and still hang­ing from an iron chain, the board on its stern eaten away by ma­rine salts! How many lives were dashed in this ship­wreck! How many vic­tims were swept un­der the waves! Had some sailor on board lived to tell the story of this dread­ful dis­as­ter, or do the waves still keep this ca­su­alty a se­cret? It oc­curred to me, lord knows why, that this boat buried un­der the sea might have been the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">At­las</i>, lost with all hands some twenty years ago and never heard from again! Oh, what a grue­some tale these Mediter­ranean depths could tell, this huge bone­yard where so much wealth has been lost, where so many vic­tims have met their deaths!</p>
				<p>Mean­while, briskly un­con­cerned, the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i> ran at full pro­pel­ler through the midst of these ru­ins. On Fe­bru­ary 18, near three o’clock in the morn­ing, it hove be­fore the en­trance to the Strait of Gi­bral­tar.</p>
				<p>There are two cur­rents here: an up­per cur­rent, long known to ex­ist, that car­ries the ocean’s wa­ters into the Mediter­ranean basin; then a lower coun­ter­cur­rent, the only present-day proof of its ex­is­tence be­ing logic. In essence, the Mediter­ranean re­ceives a con­tin­ual in­flux of wa­ter not only from the At­lantic but from rivers emp­ty­ing into it; since lo­cal evap­o­ra­tion isn’t enough to re­store the bal­ance, the to­tal amount of added wa­ter should make this sea’s level higher ev­ery year. Yet this isn’t the case, and we’re nat­u­rally forced to be­lieve in the ex­is­tence of some lower cur­rent that car­ries the Mediter­ranean’s sur­plus through the Strait of Gi­bral­tar and into the At­lantic basin.</p>
				<p>And so it turned out. The <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i> took full ad­van­tage of this coun­ter­cur­rent. It ad­vanced swiftly through this nar­row pas­sage­way. For an in­stant I could glimpse the won­der­ful ru­ins of the Tem­ple of Her­cules, buried un­der­sea, as Pliny and Avianus have men­tioned, to­gether with the flat is­land they stand on; and a few min­utes later, we were float­ing on the waves of the At­lantic.</p>
			</section>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
