<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="en-US" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: http://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Chapter 8</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="part-2" epub:type="part">
			<section id="chapter-2-8" epub:type="chapter">
				<h3 epub:type="title">
					<span class="first-child" epub:type="z3998:roman">VIII</span>
					<span class="epub-type-subtitle" epub:type="subtitle">The Bay of Vigo</span>
				</h3>
				<p>The At­lantic! A vast ex­panse of wa­ter whose sur­face area is 25,000,000 square miles, with a length of 9,000 miles and an av­er­age width of 2,700. A ma­jor sea nearly un­known to the an­cients, ex­cept per­haps the Carthagini­ans, those Dutch­men of an­tiq­uity who went along the west coasts of Europe and Africa on their com­mer­cial jun­kets! An ocean whose par­al­lel wind­ing shores form an im­mense perime­ter fed by the world’s great­est rivers: the St. Lawrence, Mis­sis­sippi, Ama­zon, Plata, Orinoco, Niger, Sene­gal, Elbe, Loire, and Rhine, which bring it wa­ters from the most civ­i­lized coun­tries as well as the most un­de­vel­oped ar­eas! A mag­nif­i­cent plain of waves plowed con­tin­u­ously by ships of ev­ery na­tion, shaded by ev­ery flag in the world, and end­ing in those two dread­ful head­lands so feared by nav­i­ga­tors, Cape Horn and the Cape of Tem­pests!</p>
				<p>The <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i> broke these wa­ters with the edge of its spur af­ter do­ing nearly 10,000 leagues in three and a half months, a track longer than a great cir­cle of the earth. Where were we head­ing now, and what did the fu­ture have in store for us?</p>
				<p>Emerg­ing from the Strait of Gi­bral­tar, the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i> took to the high seas. It re­turned to the sur­face of the waves, so our daily strolls on the plat­form were re­stored to us.</p>
				<p>I climbed onto it in­stantly, Ned Land and Con­seil along with me. Twelve miles away, Cape St. Vin­cent was hazily vis­i­ble, the south­west­ern tip of the His­panic penin­sula. The wind was blow­ing a pretty strong gust from the south. The sea was swelling and surg­ing. Its waves made the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i> roll and jerk vi­o­lently. It was nearly im­pos­si­ble to stand up on the plat­form, which was con­tin­u­ously buf­feted by this enor­mously heavy sea. After in­hal­ing a few breaths of air, we went be­low once more.</p>
				<p>I re­paired to my state­room. Con­seil re­turned to his cabin; but the Cana­dian, look­ing rather wor­ried, fol­lowed me. Our quick trip through the Mediter­ranean hadn’t al­lowed him to put his plans into ex­e­cu­tion, and he could barely con­ceal his dis­ap­point­ment.</p>
				<p>After the door to my state­room was closed, he sat and stared at me silently.</p>
				<p>“Ned my friend,” I told him, “I know how you feel, but you mustn’t blame your­self. Given the way the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i> was nav­i­gat­ing, it would have been sheer in­san­ity to think of es­cap­ing!”</p>
				<p>Ned Land didn’t re­ply. His pursed lips and frown­ing brow in­di­cated that he was in the grip of his mono­ma­nia.</p>
				<p>“Look here,” I went on, “as yet there’s no cause for de­spair. We’re go­ing up the coast of Por­tu­gal. France and Eng­land aren’t far off, and there we’ll eas­ily find refuge. Oh, I grant you, if the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i> had emerged from the Strait of Gi­bral­tar and made for that cape in the south, if it were tak­ing us to­ward those re­gions that have no con­ti­nents, then I’d share your alarm. But we now know that Cap­tain Nemo doesn’t avoid the seas of civ­i­liza­tion, and in a few days I think we can safely take ac­tion.”</p>
				<p>Ned Land stared at me still more in­tently and fi­nally un­pursed his lips:</p>
				<p>“We’ll do it this evening,” he said.</p>
				<p>I straight­ened sud­denly. I ad­mit that I was less than ready for this an­nounce­ment. I wanted to re­ply to the Cana­dian, but words failed me.</p>
				<p>“We agreed to wait for the right cir­cum­stances,” Ned Land went on. “Now we’ve got those cir­cum­stances. This evening we’ll be just a few miles off the coast of Spain. It’ll be cloudy tonight. The wind’s blow­ing to­ward shore. You gave me your prom­ise, Pro­fes­sor Aron­nax, and I’m count­ing on you.”</p>
				<p>Since I didn’t say any­thing, the Cana­dian stood up and ap­proached me:</p>
				<p>“We’ll do it this evening at nine o’clock,” he said. “I’ve alerted Con­seil. By that time Cap­tain Nemo will be locked in his room and prob­a­bly in bed. Nei­ther the me­chan­ics or the crew­men will be able to see us. Con­seil and I will go to the cen­tral com­pan­ion­way. As for you, Pro­fes­sor Aron­nax, you’ll stay in the li­brary two steps away and wait for my sig­nal. The oars, mast, and sail are in the skiff. I’ve even man­aged to stow some pro­vi­sions in­side. I’ve got­ten hold of a mon­key wrench to un­screw the nuts bolt­ing the skiff to the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i>’s hull. So ev­ery­thing’s ready. I’ll see you this evening.”</p>
				<p>“The sea is rough,” I said.</p>
				<p>“Ad­mit­ted,” the Cana­dian replied, “but we’ve got to risk it. Free­dom is worth pay­ing for. Be­sides, the long­boat’s solidly built, and a few miles with the wind be­hind us is no big deal. By to­mor­row, who knows if this ship won’t be 100 leagues out to sea? If cir­cum­stances are in our fa­vor, be­tween ten and eleven this evening we’ll be land­ing on some piece of solid ground, or we’ll be dead. So we’re in God’s hands, and I’ll see you this evening!”</p>
				<p>This said, the Cana­dian with­drew, leav­ing me close to dumb­founded. I had imag­ined that if it came to this, I would have time to think about it, to talk it over. My stub­born com­pan­ion hadn’t granted me this cour­tesy. But af­ter all, what would I have said to him? Ned Land was right a hun­dred times over. Th­ese were near-ideal cir­cum­stances, and he was tak­ing full ad­van­tage of them. In my self­ish per­sonal in­ter­ests, could I go back on my word and be re­spon­si­ble for ru­in­ing the fu­ture lives of my com­pan­ions? To­mor­row, might not Cap­tain Nemo take us far away from any shore?</p>
				<p>Just then a fairly loud hiss­ing told me that the bal­last tanks were fill­ing, and the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i> sank be­neath the waves of the At­lantic.</p>
				<p>I stayed in my state­room. I wanted to avoid the cap­tain, to hide from his eyes the ag­i­ta­tion over­whelm­ing me. What an ag­o­niz­ing day I spent, torn be­tween my de­sire to re­gain my free will and my re­gret at aban­don­ing this mar­velous <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i>, leav­ing my un­der­wa­ter re­search in­com­plete! How could I re­lin­quish this ocean—“my own At­lantic,” as I liked to call it—with­out ob­serv­ing its lower strata, with­out wrest­ing from it the kinds of se­crets that had been re­vealed to me by the seas of the East Indies and the Pa­cific! I was putting down my novel half read, I was wak­ing up as my dream neared its cli­max! How painfully the hours passed, as I some­times en­vi­sioned my­self safe on shore with my com­pan­ions, or, de­spite my bet­ter judg­ment, as I some­times wished that some un­fore­seen cir­cum­stances would pre­vent Ned Land from car­ry­ing out his plans.</p>
				<p>Twice I went to the lounge. I wanted to con­sult the com­pass. I wanted to see if the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i>’s head­ing was ac­tu­ally tak­ing us closer to the coast or spir­it­ing us far­ther away. But no. The <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i> was still in Por­tuguese wa­ters. Head­ing north, it was cruis­ing along the ocean’s beaches.</p>
				<p>So I had to re­sign my­self to my fate and get ready to es­cape. My bag­gage wasn’t heavy. My notes, noth­ing more.</p>
				<p>As for Cap­tain Nemo, I won­dered what he would make of our es­cap­ing, what con­cern or per­haps what dis­tress it might cause him, and what he would do in the twofold event of our at­tempt ei­ther fail­ing or be­ing found out! Cer­tainly I had no com­plaints to reg­is­ter with him, on the con­trary. Never was hos­pi­tal­ity more whole­hearted than his. Yet in leav­ing him I couldn’t be ac­cused of in­grat­i­tude. No solemn prom­ises bound us to him. In or­der to keep us cap­tive, he had counted only on the force of cir­cum­stances and not on our word of honor. But his avowed in­ten­tion to im­prison us for­ever on his ship jus­ti­fied our ev­ery ef­fort.</p>
				<p>I hadn’t seen the cap­tain since our visit to the is­land of San­torini. Would fate bring me into his pres­ence be­fore our de­par­ture? I both de­sired and dreaded it. I lis­tened for foot­steps in the state­room ad­join­ing mine. Not a sound reached my ear. His state­room had to be de­serted.</p>
				<p>Then I be­gan to won­der if this ec­cen­tric in­di­vid­ual was even on board. Since that night when the skiff had left the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i> on some mys­te­ri­ous mis­sion, my ideas about him had sub­tly changed. In spite of ev­ery­thing, I thought that Cap­tain Nemo must have kept up some type of re­la­tion­ship with the shore. Did he him­self never leave the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i>? Whole weeks had of­ten gone by with­out my en­coun­ter­ing him. What was he do­ing all the while? Dur­ing all those times I’d thought he was con­va­lesc­ing in the grip of some mis­an­thropic fit, was he in­stead far away from the ship, in­volved in some se­cret ac­tiv­ity whose na­ture still eluded me?</p>
				<p>All these ideas and a thou­sand oth­ers as­saulted me at the same time. In these strange cir­cum­stances the scope for con­jec­ture was un­lim­ited. I felt an un­bear­able queasi­ness. This day of wait­ing seemed end­less. The hours struck too slowly to keep up with my im­pa­tience.</p>
				<p>As usual, din­ner was served me in my state­room. Full of anx­i­ety, I ate lit­tle. I left the ta­ble at seven o’clock. 120 min­utes—I was keep­ing track of them—still sep­a­rated me from the mo­ment I was to re­join Ned Land. My ag­i­ta­tion in­creased. My pulse was throb­bing vi­o­lently. I couldn’t stand still. I walked up and down, hop­ing to calm my trou­bled mind with move­ment. The pos­si­bil­ity of per­ish­ing in our reck­less un­der­tak­ing was the least of my wor­ries; my heart was pound­ing at the thought that our plans might be dis­cov­ered be­fore we had left the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i>, at the thought of be­ing hauled in front of Cap­tain Nemo and find­ing him an­gered, or worse, sad­dened by my de­sert­ing him.</p>
				<p>I wanted to see the lounge one last time. I went down the gang­ways and ar­rived at the mu­seum where I had spent so many pleas­ant and pro­duc­tive hours. I stared at all its wealth, all its trea­sures, like a man on the eve of his eter­nal ex­ile, a man de­part­ing to re­turn no more. For so many days now, these nat­u­ral won­ders and artis­tic mas­ter­works had been cen­tral to my life, and I was about to leave them be­hind for­ever. I wanted to plunge my eyes through the lounge win­dow and into these At­lantic wa­ters; but the pan­els were her­met­i­cally sealed, and a man­tle of sheet iron sep­a­rated me from this ocean with which I was still un­fa­mil­iar.</p>
				<p>Cross­ing through the lounge, I ar­rived at the door, con­trived in one of the canted cor­ners, that opened into the cap­tain’s state­room. Much to my as­ton­ish­ment, this door was ajar. I in­stinc­tively re­coiled. If Cap­tain Nemo was in his state­room, he might see me. But, not hear­ing any sounds, I ap­proached. The state­room was de­serted. I pushed the door open. I took a few steps in­side. Still the same aus­tere, monas­tic ap­pear­ance.</p>
				<p>Just then my eye was caught by some etch­ings hang­ing on the wall, which I hadn’t no­ticed dur­ing my first visit. They were por­traits of great men of his­tory who had spent their lives in per­pet­ual de­vo­tion to a great hu­man ideal: Thad­deus Kosciusko, the hero whose dy­ing words had been <i lang="la" xml:lang="la">Fi­nis Polo­niae</i>;<a class="epub-type-noteref" href="../text/endnotes.xhtml#note-16" id="note-16" epub:type="noteref">16</a> Markos Botzaris, for mod­ern Greece the rein­car­na­tion of Sparta’s King Leonidas; Daniel O’Con­nell, Ire­land’s de­fender; Ge­orge Wash­ing­ton, founder of the Amer­i­can Union; Daniele Manin, the Ital­ian pa­triot; Abra­ham Lin­coln, dead from the bul­let of a be­liever in slav­ery; and fi­nally, that mar­tyr for the re­demp­tion of the black race, John Brown, hang­ing from his gal­lows as Vic­tor Hugo’s pen­cil has so ter­ri­fy­ingly de­picted.</p>
				<p>What was the bond be­tween these heroic souls and the soul of Cap­tain Nemo? From this col­lec­tion of por­traits could I fi­nally un­ravel the mys­tery of his ex­is­tence? Was he a fighter for op­pressed peo­ples, a lib­er­a­tor of en­slaved races? Had he fig­ured in the re­cent po­lit­i­cal or so­cial up­heavals of this cen­tury? Was he a hero of that dread­ful civil war in Amer­ica, a war lam­en­ta­ble yet for­ever glo­ri­ous … ?</p>
				<p>Sud­denly the clock struck eight. The first stroke of its ham­mer on the chime snapped me out of my mus­ings. I shud­dered as if some in­vis­i­ble eye had plunged into my in­ner­most thoughts, and I rushed out­side the state­room.</p>
				<p>There my eyes fell on the com­pass. Our head­ing was still northerly. The log in­di­cated a mod­er­ate speed, the pres­sure gauge a depth of about sixty feet. So cir­cum­stances were in fa­vor of the Cana­dian’s plans.</p>
				<p>I stayed in my state­room. I dressed warmly: fish­ing boots, ot­ter cap, coat of fan-mus­sel fab­ric lined with seal­skin. I was ready. I was wait­ing. Only the pro­pel­ler’s vi­bra­tions dis­turbed the deep si­lence reign­ing on board. I cocked an ear and lis­tened. Would a sud­den out­burst of voices tell me that Ned Land’s es­cape plans had just been de­tected? A ghastly un­easi­ness stole through me. I tried in vain to re­cover my com­po­sure.</p>
				<p>A few min­utes be­fore nine o’clock, I glued my ear to the cap­tain’s door. Not a sound. I left my state­room and re­turned to the lounge, which was de­serted and plunged in near dark­ness.</p>
				<p>I opened the door lead­ing to the li­brary. The same in­ad­e­quate light, the same soli­tude. I went to man my post near the door open­ing into the well of the cen­tral com­pan­ion­way. I waited for Ned Land’s sig­nal.</p>
				<p>At this point the pro­pel­ler’s vi­bra­tions slowed down ap­pre­cia­bly, then they died out al­to­gether. Why was the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i> stop­ping? Whether this lay­over would help or hin­der Ned Land’s schemes I couldn’t have said.</p>
				<p>The si­lence was fur­ther dis­turbed only by the pound­ing of my heart.</p>
				<p>Sud­denly I felt a mild jolt. I re­al­ized the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i> had come to rest on the ocean floor. My alarm in­creased. The Cana­dian’s sig­nal hadn’t reached me. I longed to re­join Ned Land and urge him to post­pone his at­tempt. I sensed that we were no longer nav­i­gat­ing un­der nor­mal con­di­tions.</p>
				<p>Just then the door to the main lounge opened and Cap­tain Nemo ap­peared. He saw me, and with­out fur­ther pre­am­ble:</p>
				<p>“Ah, pro­fes­sor,” he said in an af­fa­ble tone, “I’ve been look­ing for you. Do you know your Span­ish his­tory?”</p>
				<p>Even if he knew it by heart, a man in my dis­turbed, be­fud­dled con­di­tion couldn’t have quoted a syl­la­ble of his own coun­try’s his­tory.</p>
				<p>“Well?” Cap­tain Nemo went on. “Did you hear my ques­tion? Do you know the his­tory of Spain?”</p>
				<p>“Very lit­tle of it,” I replied.</p>
				<p>“The most learned men,” the cap­tain said, “still have much to learn. Have a seat,” he added, “and I’ll tell you about an un­usual episode in this body of his­tory.”</p>
				<p>The cap­tain stretched out on a couch, and I me­chan­i­cally took a seat near him, but half in the shad­ows.</p>
				<p>“Pro­fes­sor,” he said, “lis­ten care­fully. This piece of his­tory con­cerns you in one def­i­nite re­spect, be­cause it will an­swer a ques­tion you’ve no doubt been un­able to re­solve.”</p>
				<p>“I’m lis­ten­ing, cap­tain,” I said, not know­ing what my part­ner in this di­a­logue was driv­ing at, and won­der­ing if this in­ci­dent re­lated to our es­cape plans.</p>
				<p>“Pro­fes­sor,” Cap­tain Nemo went on, “if you’re amenable, we’ll go back in time to 1702. You’re aware of the fact that in those days your King Louis <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XIV</span> thought an im­pe­rial ges­ture would suf­fice to hum­ble the Pyre­nees in the dust, so he in­flicted his grand­son, the Duke of An­jou, on the Spa­niards. Reign­ing more or less poorly un­der the name King Philip <span epub:type="z3998:roman">V</span>, this aris­to­crat had to deal with mighty op­po­nents abroad.</p>
				<p>“In essence, the year be­fore, the royal houses of Hol­land, Aus­tria, and Eng­land had signed a treaty of al­liance at The Hague, aim­ing to wrest the Span­ish crown from King Philip <span epub:type="z3998:roman">V</span> and to place it on the head of an arch­duke whom they pre­ma­turely dubbed King Charles <span epub:type="z3998:roman">III</span>.</p>
				<p>“Spain had to with­stand these al­lies. But the coun­try had prac­ti­cally no army or navy. Yet it wasn’t short of money, pro­vided that its galleons, laden with gold and sil­ver from Amer­ica, could en­ter its ports. Now then, late in 1702 Spain was ex­pect­ing a rich con­voy, which France ven­tured to es­cort with a fleet of twenty-three ves­sels un­der the com­mand of Ad­mi­ral de Château-Re­nault, be­cause by that time the al­lied navies were rov­ing the At­lantic.</p>
				<p>“This con­voy was sup­posed to put into Cadiz, but af­ter learn­ing that the English fleet lay across those wa­ter­ways, the ad­mi­ral de­cided to make for a French port.</p>
				<p>“The Span­ish com­man­ders in the con­voy ob­jected to this de­ci­sion. They wanted to be taken to a Span­ish port, if not to Cadiz, then to the Bay of Vigo, lo­cated on Spain’s north­west coast and not block­aded.</p>
				<p>“Ad­mi­ral de Château-Re­nault was so in­de­ci­sive as to obey this di­rec­tive, and the galleons en­tered the Bay of Vigo.</p>
				<p>“Un­for­tu­nately this bay forms an open, off­shore moor­ing that’s im­pos­si­ble to de­fend. So it was es­sen­tial to hurry and empty the galleons be­fore the al­lied fleets ar­rived, and there would have been am­ple time for this un­load­ing, if a wretched ques­tion of trade agree­ments hadn’t sud­denly come up.</p>
				<p>“Are you clear on the chain of events?” Cap­tain Nemo asked me.</p>
				<p>“Per­fectly clear,” I said, not yet know­ing why I was be­ing given this his­tory les­son.</p>
				<p>“Then I’ll con­tinue. Here’s what came to pass. The trades­men of Cadiz had ne­go­ti­ated a char­ter whereby they were to re­ceive all mer­chan­dise com­ing from the West Indies. Now then, un­load­ing the in­gots from those galleons at the port of Vigo would have been a vi­o­la­tion of their rights. So they lodged a com­plaint in Madrid, and they ob­tained an or­der from the in­de­ci­sive King Philip V: with­out un­load­ing, the con­voy would stay in cus­tody at the off­shore moor­ing of Vigo un­til the en­emy fleets had re­treated.</p>
				<p>“Now then, just as this de­ci­sion was be­ing handed down, English ves­sels ar­rived in the Bay of Vigo on Oc­to­ber 22, 1702. De­spite his in­fe­rior forces, Ad­mi­ral de Château-Re­nault fought coura­geously. But when he saw that the con­voy’s wealth was about to fall into en­emy hands, he burned and scut­tled the galleons, which went to the bot­tom with their im­mense trea­sures.”</p>
				<p>Cap­tain Nemo stopped. I ad­mit it: I still couldn’t see how this piece of his­tory con­cerned me.</p>
				<p>“Well?” I asked him.</p>
				<p>“Well, Pro­fes­sor Aron­nax,” Cap­tain Nemo an­swered me, “we’re ac­tu­ally in that Bay of Vigo, and all that’s left is for you to probe the mys­ter­ies of the place.”</p>
				<p>The cap­tain stood up and in­vited me to fol­low him. I’d had time to col­lect my­self. I did so. The lounge was dark, but the sea’s waves sparkled through the trans­par­ent win­dows. I stared.</p>
				<p>Around the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i> for a half-mile ra­dius, the wa­ters seemed sat­u­rated with elec­tric light. The sandy bot­tom was clear and bright. Dressed in div­ing suits, crew­men were busy clear­ing away half-rot­ted bar­rels and dis­em­bow­eled trunks in the midst of the dingy hulks of ships. Out of these trunks and kegs spilled in­gots of gold and sil­ver, cas­cades of jew­els, pieces of eight. The sand was heaped with them. Then, laden with these valu­able spoils, the men re­turned to the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i>, dropped off their bur­dens in­side, and went to re­sume this in­ex­haustible fish­ing for sil­ver and gold.</p>
				<p>I un­der­stood. This was the set­ting of that bat­tle on Oc­to­ber 22, 1702. Here, in this very place, those galleons car­ry­ing trea­sure to the Span­ish gov­ern­ment had gone to the bot­tom. Here, when­ever he needed, Cap­tain Nemo came to with­draw these mil­lions to bal­last his <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i>. It was for him, for him alone, that Amer­ica had yielded up its pre­cious met­als. He was the di­rect, sole heir to these trea­sures wrested from the In­cas and those peo­ples con­quered by Her­nando Cortez!</p>
				<p>“Did you know, pro­fes­sor,” he asked me with a smile, “that the sea con­tained such wealth?”</p>
				<p>“I know it’s es­ti­mated,” I replied, “that there are 2,000,000 met­ric tons of sil­ver held in sus­pen­sion in sea­wa­ter.”</p>
				<p>“Surely, but in ex­tract­ing that sil­ver, your ex­penses would out­weigh your prof­its. Here, by con­trast, I have only to pick up what other men have lost, and not only in this Bay of Vigo but at a thou­sand other sites where ships have gone down, whose po­si­tions are marked on my un­der­wa­ter chart. Do you un­der­stand now that I’m rich to the tune of bil­lions?”</p>
				<p>“I un­der­stand, cap­tain. Nev­er­the­less, al­low me to in­form you that by har­vest­ing this very Bay of Vigo, you’re sim­ply fore­stalling the ef­forts of a ri­val or­ga­ni­za­tion.”</p>
				<p>“What or­ga­ni­za­tion?”</p>
				<p>“A com­pany char­tered by the Span­ish gov­ern­ment to search for these sunken galleons. The com­pany’s in­vestors were lured by the bait of enor­mous gains, be­cause this scut­tled trea­sure is es­ti­mated to be worth 500,000,000 francs.”</p>
				<p>“It was 500,000,000 francs,” Cap­tain Nemo replied, “but no more!”</p>
				<p>“Right,” I said. “Hence a timely warn­ing to those in­vestors would be an act of char­ity. Yet who knows if it would be well re­ceived? Usu­ally what gam­blers re­gret the most isn’t the loss of their money so much as the loss of their in­sane hopes. But ul­ti­mately I feel less sorry for them than for the thou­sands of un­for­tu­nate peo­ple who would have ben­e­fited from a fair dis­tri­bu­tion of this wealth, whereas now it will be of no help to them!”</p>
				<p>No sooner had I voiced this re­gret than I felt it must have wounded Cap­tain Nemo.</p>
				<p>“No help!” he replied with grow­ing an­i­ma­tion. “Sir, what makes you as­sume this wealth goes to waste when I’m the one amass­ing it? Do you think I toil to gather this trea­sure out of self­ish­ness? Who says I don’t put it to good use? Do you think I’m un­aware of the suf­fer­ing be­ings and op­pressed races liv­ing on this earth, poor peo­ple to com­fort, vic­tims to avenge? Don’t you un­der­stand … ?”</p>
				<p>Cap­tain Nemo stopped on these last words, per­haps sorry that he had said too much. But I had guessed. What­ever mo­tives had driven him to seek in­de­pen­dence un­der the seas, he re­mained a hu­man be­ing be­fore all else! His heart still throbbed for suf­fer­ing hu­man­ity, and his im­mense phi­lan­thropy went out both to down­trod­den races and to in­di­vid­u­als!</p>
				<p>And now I knew where Cap­tain Nemo had de­liv­ered those mil­lions, when the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i> nav­i­gated the wa­ters where Crete was in re­bel­lion against the Ot­toman Em­pire!</p>
			</section>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
