<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="en-US" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: http://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Chapter 19</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="part-1" epub:type="part">
			<section id="chapter-1-19" epub:type="chapter">
				<h3 epub:type="title">
					<span class="first-child" epub:type="z3998:roman">XIX</span>
					<span class="epub-type-subtitle" epub:type="subtitle">Vanikoro</span>
				</h3>
				<p>This dread­ful sight was the first of a whole se­ries of mar­itime catas­tro­phes that the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i> would en­counter on its run. When it plied more heav­ily trav­eled seas, we of­ten saw wrecked hulls rot­ting in mid­wa­ter, and far­ther down, can­nons, shells, an­chors, chains, and a thou­sand other iron ob­jects rust­ing away.</p>
				<p>Mean­while, con­tin­u­ously swept along by the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i>, where we lived in near iso­la­tion, we raised the Tuamotu Is­lands on De­cem­ber 11, that old “dan­ger­ous group” as­so­ci­ated with the French global nav­i­ga­tor Com­man­der Bougainville; it stretches from Du­cie Is­land to Lazareff Is­land over an area of 500 leagues from the east-south­east to the west-north­west, be­tween lat­i­tude 13° 30′ and 23° 50′ south, and be­tween lon­gi­tude 125° 30′ and 151° 30′ west. This is­land group cov­ers a sur­face area of 370 square leagues, and it’s made up of some sixty sub­groups, among which we noted the Gam­bier group, which is a French pro­tec­torate. Th­ese is­lands are coral for­ma­tions. Thanks to the work of polyps, a slow but steady up­heaval will some­day con­nect these is­lands to each other. Later on, this new is­land will be fused to its neigh­bor­ing is­land groups, and a fifth con­ti­nent will stretch from New Zealand and New Cale­do­nia as far as the Mar­que­sas Is­lands.</p>
				<p>The day I ex­pounded this the­ory to Cap­tain Nemo, he an­swered me coldly:</p>
				<p>“The earth doesn’t need new con­ti­nents, but new men!”</p>
				<p>Sailors’ luck led the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i> straight to Reao Is­land, one of the most un­usual in this group, which was dis­cov­ered in 1822 by Cap­tain Bell aboard the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Min­erva</i>. So I was able to study the madreporic process that has cre­ated the is­lands in this ocean.</p>
				<p><i epub:type="z3998:taxonomy">Madrepores</i>, which one must guard against con­fus­ing with pre­cious coral, clothe their tis­sue in a lime­stone crust, and their vari­a­tions in struc­ture have led my fa­mous men­tor Pro­fes­sor Milne-Ed­wards to clas­sify them into five di­vi­sions. The tiny mi­cro­scopic an­i­mals that se­crete this poly­pary live by the bil­lions in the depths of their cells. Their lime­stone de­posits build up into rocks, reefs, islets, is­lands. In some places, they form atolls, a cir­cu­lar ring sur­round­ing a la­goon or small in­ner lake that gaps place in con­tact with the sea. Else­where, they take the shape of bar­rier reefs, such as those that ex­ist along the coasts of New Cale­do­nia and sev­eral of the Tuamotu Is­lands. In still other lo­cal­i­ties, such as Réu­nion Is­land and the is­land of Mau­ri­tius, they build fring­ing reefs, high, straight walls next to which the ocean’s depth is con­sid­er­able.</p>
				<p>While cruis­ing along only a few ca­ble lengths from the un­der­pin­ning of Reao Is­land, I mar­veled at the gi­gan­tic piece of work ac­com­plished by these mi­cro­scopic la­bor­ers. Th­ese walls were the ex­press achieve­ments of <i epub:type="z3998:taxonomy">madrepores</i> known by the names fire coral, fin­ger coral, star coral, and stony coral. Th­ese polyps grow ex­clu­sively in the ag­i­tated strata at the sur­face of the sea, and so it’s in the up­per reaches that they be­gin these sub­struc­tures, which sink lit­tle by lit­tle to­gether with the se­creted rub­ble bind­ing them. This, at least, is the the­ory of Mr. Charles Dar­win, who thus ex­plains the for­ma­tion of atolls—a the­ory su­pe­rior, in my view, to the one that says these madreporic ed­i­fices sit on the sum­mits of moun­tains or vol­ca­noes sub­merged a few feet be­low sea level.</p>
				<p>I could ob­serve these strange walls quite closely: our sound­ing lines in­di­cated that they dropped per­pen­dic­u­larly for more than 300 me­ters, and our elec­tric beams made the bright lime­stone pos­i­tively sparkle.</p>
				<p>In re­ply to a ques­tion Con­seil asked me about the growth rate of these colos­sal bar­ri­ers, I thor­oughly amazed him by say­ing that sci­en­tists put it at an eighth of an inch per bi­en­nium.</p>
				<p>“There­fore,” he said to me, “to build these walls, it took … ?”</p>
				<p>“192,000 years, my gal­lant Con­seil, which sig­nif­i­cantly ex­tends the bib­li­cal Days of Creation. What’s more, the for­ma­tion of coal—in other words, the pet­ri­fi­ca­tion of forests swal­lowed by floods—and the cool­ing of basaltic rocks like­wise call for a much longer pe­riod of time. I might add that those ‘days’ in the Bi­ble must rep­re­sent whole epochs and not lit­er­ally the lapse of time be­tween two sun­rises, be­cause ac­cord­ing to the Bi­ble it­self, the sun doesn’t date from the first day of Creation.”</p>
				<p>When the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i> re­turned to the sur­face of the ocean, I could take in Reao Is­land over its whole flat, wooded ex­panse. Ob­vi­ously its madreporic rocks had been made fer­tile by tor­na­does and thun­der­storms. One day, car­ried off by a hur­ri­cane from neigh­bor­ing shores, some seed fell onto these lime­stone beds, mix­ing with de­com­posed par­ti­cles of fish and ma­rine plants to form veg­etable hu­mus. Pro­pelled by the waves, a co­conut ar­rived on this new coast. Its germ took root. Its tree grew tall, catch­ing steam off the wa­ter. A brook was born. Lit­tle by lit­tle, veg­e­ta­tion spread. Tiny an­i­mals—worms, in­sects—rode ashore on tree trunks snatched from is­lands to wind­ward. Tur­tles came to lay their eggs. Birds nested in the young trees. In this way an­i­mal life de­vel­oped, and drawn by the green­ery and fer­tile soil, man ap­peared. And that’s how these is­lands were formed, the im­mense achieve­ment of mi­cro­scopic an­i­mals.</p>
				<p>Near evening Reao Is­land melted into the dis­tance, and the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i> no­tice­ably changed course. After touch­ing the Tropic of Capri­corn at lon­gi­tude 135°, it headed west-north­west, go­ing back up the whole in­tertrop­i­cal zone. Although the sum­mer sun lav­ished its rays on us, we never suf­fered from the heat, be­cause thirty or forty me­ters un­der­wa­ter, the tem­per­a­ture didn’t go over 10° to 12° centi­grade.</p>
				<p>By De­cem­ber 15 we had left the al­lur­ing So­ci­ety Is­lands in the west, like­wise el­e­gant Tahiti, queen of the Pa­cific. In the morn­ing I spot­ted this is­land’s lofty sum­mits a few miles to lee­ward. Its wa­ters sup­plied ex­cel­lent fish for the ta­bles on board: mack­erel, bonito, al­ba­core, and a few va­ri­eties of that sea ser­pent named the moray eel.</p>
				<p>The <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i> had cleared 8,100 miles. We logged 9,720 miles when we passed be­tween the Tonga Is­lands, where crews from the Argo, Port-au-Prince, and Duke of Port­land had per­ished, and the is­land group of Samoa, scene of the slay­ing of Cap­tain de Lan­gle, friend of that long-lost nav­i­ga­tor, the Count de La Pérouse. Then we raised the Fiji Is­lands, where sav­ages slaugh­tered sailors from the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Union</i>, as well as Cap­tain Bureau, com­man­der of the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Dar­ling Josephine</i> out of Nantes, France.</p>
				<p>Ex­tend­ing over an ex­panse of 100 leagues north to south, and over 90 leagues east to west, this is­land group lies be­tween lat­i­tude 2° and 6° south, and be­tween lon­gi­tude 174° and 179° west. It con­sists of a num­ber of is­lands, islets, and reefs, among which we noted the is­lands of Viti Levu, Vanua Levu, and Ka­davu.</p>
				<p>It was the Dutch nav­i­ga­tor Tas­man who dis­cov­ered this group in 1643, the same year the Ital­ian physi­cist Tor­ri­celli in­vented the barom­e­ter and King Louis <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XIV</span> as­cended the French throne. I’ll let the reader de­cide which of these deeds was more ben­e­fi­cial to hu­man­ity. Com­ing later, Cap­tain Cook in 1774, Rear Ad­mi­ral d’En­tre­casteaux in 1793, and fi­nally Cap­tain Du­mont d’Urville in 1827, un­tan­gled the whole chaotic ge­og­ra­phy of this is­land group. The <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i> drew near Wailea Bay, an un­lucky place for Eng­land’s Cap­tain Dil­lon, who was the first to shed light on the long­stand­ing mys­tery sur­round­ing the dis­ap­pear­ance of ships un­der the Count de La Pérouse.</p>
				<p>This bay, re­peat­edly dredged, fur­nished a huge sup­ply of ex­cel­lent oys­ters. As the Ro­man play­wright Seneca rec­om­mended, we opened them right at our ta­ble, then stuffed our­selves. Th­ese mol­lusks be­longed to the species known by name as <i epub:type="z3998:taxonomy">Ostrea lamel­losa</i>, whose mem­bers are quite com­mon off Cor­sica. This Wailea oys­ter­bank must have been ex­ten­sive, and for cer­tain, if they hadn’t been con­trolled by nu­mer­ous nat­u­ral checks, these clus­ters of shell­fish would have ended up jam-pack­ing the bay, since as many as 2,000,000 eggs have been counted in a sin­gle in­di­vid­ual.</p>
				<p>And if Mr. Ned Land did not re­pent of his glut­tony at our oys­ter fest, it’s be­cause oys­ters are the only dish that never causes in­di­ges­tion. In fact, it takes no less than six­teen dozen of these head­less mol­lusks to sup­ply the 315 grams that sat­isfy one man’s min­i­mum daily re­quire­ment for ni­tro­gen.</p>
				<p>On De­cem­ber 25 the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i> nav­i­gated amid the is­land group of the New He­brides, which the Por­tuguese sea­farer Queirós dis­cov­ered in 1606, which Com­man­der Bougainville ex­plored in 1768, and to which Cap­tain Cook gave its cur­rent name in 1773. This group is chiefly made up of nine large is­lands and forms a 120-league strip from the north-north­west to the south-south­east, ly­ing be­tween lat­i­tude 2° and 15° south, and be­tween lon­gi­tude 164° and 168°. At the mo­ment of our noon sights, we passed fairly close to the is­land of Aurou, which looked to me like a mass of green woods crowned by a peak of great height.</p>
				<p>That day it was yule­tide, and it struck me that Ned Land badly missed cel­e­brat­ing “Christ­mas,” that gen­uine fam­ily hol­i­day where Protes­tants are such zealots.</p>
				<p>I hadn’t seen Cap­tain Nemo for over a week, when, on the morn­ing of the 27th, he en­tered the main lounge, as usual act­ing as if he’d been gone for just five min­utes. I was busy trac­ing the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i>’s course on the world map. The cap­tain ap­proached, placed a fin­ger over a po­si­tion on the chart, and pro­nounced just one word:</p>
				<p>“Vanikoro.”</p>
				<p>This name was magic! It was the name of those islets where ves­sels un­der the Count de La Pérouse had mis­car­ried. I straight­ened sud­denly.</p>
				<p>“The <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i> is bring­ing us to Vanikoro?” I asked.</p>
				<p>“Yes, pro­fes­sor,” the cap­tain replied.</p>
				<p>“And I’ll be able to visit those fa­mous is­lands where the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Com­pass,</i> and the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Astro­labe</i> came to grief?”</p>
				<p>“If you like, pro­fes­sor.”</p>
				<p>“When will we reach Vanikoro?”</p>
				<p>“We al­ready have, pro­fes­sor.”</p>
				<p>Fol­lowed by Cap­tain Nemo, I climbed onto the plat­form, and from there my eyes ea­gerly scanned the hori­zon.</p>
				<p>In the north­east there emerged two vol­canic is­lands of un­equal size, sur­rounded by a coral reef whose cir­cuit mea­sured forty miles. We were fac­ing the is­land of Vanikoro proper, to which Cap­tain Du­mont d’Urville had given the name “Is­land of the Search”; we lay right in front of the lit­tle har­bor of Vana, lo­cated in lat­i­tude 16° 4′ south and lon­gi­tude 164° 32′ east. Its shores seemed cov­ered with green­ery from its beaches to its sum­mits in­land, crowned by Mt. Ka­pogo, which is 476 fath­oms high.</p>
				<p>After clear­ing the outer belt of rocks via a nar­row pas­sage­way, the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i> lay in­side the break­ers where the sea had a depth of thirty to forty fath­oms. Un­der the green shade of some trop­i­cal ev­er­greens, I spot­ted a few sav­ages who looked ex­tremely star­tled at our ap­proach. In this long, black­ish ob­ject ad­vanc­ing flush with the wa­ter, didn’t they see some fear­some cetacean that they were obliged to view with dis­trust?</p>
				<p>Just then Cap­tain Nemo asked me what I knew about the ship­wreck of the Count de La Pérouse.</p>
				<p>“What ev­ery­body knows, cap­tain,” I an­swered him.</p>
				<p>“And could you kindly tell me what ev­ery­body knows?” he asked me in a gen­tly ironic tone.</p>
				<p>“Very eas­ily.”</p>
				<p>I re­lated to him what the fi­nal deeds of Cap­tain Du­mont d’Urville had brought to light, deeds de­scribed here in this heav­ily con­densed sum­mary of the whole mat­ter.</p>
				<p>In 1785 the Count de La Pérouse and his sub­or­di­nate, Cap­tain de Lan­gle, were sent by King Louis <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XVI</span> of France on a voy­age to cir­cum­nav­i­gate the globe. They boarded two sloops of war, the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Com­pass</i> and the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Astro­labe</i>, which were never seen again.</p>
				<p>In 1791, justly con­cerned about the fate of these two sloops of war, the French gov­ern­ment fit­ted out two large cargo boats, the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Search</i> and the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Hope</i>, which left Brest on Septem­ber 28 un­der or­ders from Rear Ad­mi­ral Bruni d’En­tre­casteaux. Two months later, tes­ti­mony from a cer­tain Com­man­der Bowen, aboard the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Albe­marle</i>, al­leged that rub­ble from ship­wrecked ves­sels had been seen on the coast of New Ge­or­gia. But d’En­tre­casteaux was un­aware of this news—which seemed a bit du­bi­ous any­how—and headed to­ward the Ad­mi­ralty Is­lands, which had been named in a re­port by one Cap­tain Hunter as the site of the Count de La Pérouse’s ship­wreck.</p>
				<p>They looked in vain. The <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Hope</i> and the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Search</i> passed right by Vanikoro with­out stop­ping there; and over­all, this voy­age was plagued by mis­for­tune, ul­ti­mately cost­ing the lives of Rear Ad­mi­ral d’En­tre­casteaux, two of his sub­or­di­nate of­fi­cers, and sev­eral sea­men from his crew.</p>
				<p>It was an old hand at the Pa­cific, the English ad­ven­turer Cap­tain Peter Dil­lon, who was the first to pick up the trail left by cast­aways from the wrecked ves­sels. On May 15, 1824, his ship, the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">St. Pa­trick</i>, passed by Tikopia Is­land, one of the New He­brides. There a na­tive boat­man pulled along­side in a dugout ca­noe and sold Dil­lon a sil­ver sword hilt bear­ing the im­print of char­ac­ters en­graved with a cut­ting tool known as a burin. Fur­ther­more, this na­tive boat­man claimed that dur­ing a stay in Vanikoro six years ear­lier, he had seen two Euro­peans be­long­ing to ships that had run aground on the is­land’s reefs many years be­fore.</p>
				<p>Dil­lon guessed that the ships at is­sue were those un­der the Count de La Pérouse, ships whose dis­ap­pear­ance had shaken the en­tire world. He tried to reach Vanikoro, where, ac­cord­ing to the na­tive boat­man, a good deal of rub­ble from the ship­wreck could still be found, but winds and cur­rents pre­vented his do­ing so.</p>
				<p>Dil­lon re­turned to Cal­cutta. There he was able to in­ter­est the Asi­atic So­ci­ety and the East In­dia Com­pany in his dis­cov­ery. A ship named af­ter the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Search</i> was placed at his dis­posal, and he de­parted on Jan­uary 23, 1827, ac­com­pa­nied by a French deputy.</p>
				<p>This new <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Search</i>, af­ter putting in at sev­eral stops over the Pa­cific, dropped an­chor be­fore Vanikoro on July 7, 1827, in the same har­bor of Vana where the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i> was cur­rently float­ing.</p>
				<p>There Dil­lon col­lected many relics of the ship­wreck: iron uten­sils, an­chors, eye­lets from pul­leys, swivel guns, an eigh­teen-pound shell, the re­mains of some as­tro­nom­i­cal in­stru­ments, a piece of stern­rail, and a bronze bell bear­ing the in­scrip­tion “Made by Bazin,” the foundry mark at Brest Arse­nal around 1785. There could no longer be any doubt.</p>
				<p>Fin­ish­ing his in­ves­ti­ga­tions, Dil­lon stayed at the site of the ca­su­alty un­til the month of Oc­to­ber. Then he left Vanikoro, headed to­ward New Zealand, dropped an­chor at Cal­cutta on April 7, 1828, and re­turned to France, where he re­ceived a very cor­dial wel­come from King Charles <span epub:type="z3998:roman">X</span>.</p>
				<p>But just then the renowned French ex­plorer Cap­tain Du­mont d’Urville, un­aware of Dil­lon’s ac­tiv­i­ties, had al­ready set sail to search else­where for the site of the ship­wreck. In essence, a whal­ing ves­sel had re­ported that some medals and a Cross of St. Louis had been found in the hands of sav­ages in the Louisi­ade Is­lands and New Cale­do­nia.</p>
				<p>So Cap­tain Du­mont d’Urville had put to sea in com­mand of a ves­sel named af­ter the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Astro­labe</i>, and just two months af­ter Dil­lon had left Vanikoro, Du­mont d’Urville dropped an­chor be­fore Ho­bart. There he heard about Dil­lon’s find­ings, and he fur­ther learned that a cer­tain James Hobbs, chief of­fi­cer on the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Union</i> out of Cal­cutta, had put to shore on an is­land lo­cated in lat­i­tude 8° 18′ south and lon­gi­tude 156° 30′ east, and had noted the na­tives of those wa­ter­ways mak­ing use of iron bars and red fab­rics.</p>
				<p>Pretty per­plexed, Du­mont d’Urville didn’t know if he should give cre­dence to these re­ports, which had been car­ried in some of the less re­li­able news­pa­pers; nev­er­the­less, he de­cided to start on Dil­lon’s trail.</p>
				<p>On Fe­bru­ary 10, 1828, the new <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Astro­labe</i> hove be­fore Tikopia Is­land, took on a guide and in­ter­preter in the per­son of a de­serter who had set­tled there, plied a course to­ward Vanikoro, raised it on Fe­bru­ary 12, sailed along its reefs un­til the 14th, and only on the 20th dropped an­chor in­side its bar­rier in the har­bor of Vana.</p>
				<p>On the 23rd, sev­eral of­fi­cers cir­cled the is­land and brought back some rub­ble of lit­tle im­por­tance. The na­tives, adopt­ing a sys­tem of de­nial and eva­sion, re­fused to guide them to the site of the ca­su­alty. This rather shady con­duct aroused the sus­pi­cion that the na­tives had mis­treated the cast­aways; and in truth, the na­tives seemed afraid that Du­mont d’Urville had come to avenge the Count de La Pérouse and his un­for­tu­nate com­pan­ions.</p>
				<p>But on the 26th, ap­peased with gifts and see­ing that they didn’t need to fear any reprisals, the na­tives led the chief of­fi­cer, Mr. Jac­quinot, to the site of the ship­wreck.</p>
				<p>At this lo­ca­tion, in three or four fath­oms of wa­ter be­tween the Paeu and Vana reefs, there lay some an­chors, can­nons, and in­gots of iron and lead, all caked with lime­stone con­cre­tions. A launch and whale­boat from the new <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Astro­labe</i> were steered to this lo­cal­ity, and af­ter go­ing to ex­haust­ing lengths, their crews man­aged to dredge up an an­chor weigh­ing 1,800 pounds, a cast-iron eight-pounder can­non, a lead in­got, and two cop­per swivel guns.</p>
				<p>Ques­tion­ing the na­tives, Cap­tain Du­mont d’Urville also learned that af­ter La Pérouse’s two ships had mis­car­ried on the is­land’s reefs, the count had built a smaller craft, only to go off and mis­carry a sec­ond time. Where? No­body knew.</p>
				<p>The com­man­der of the new <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Astro­labe</i> then had a mon­u­ment erected un­der a tuft of man­grove, in mem­ory of the fa­mous nav­i­ga­tor and his com­pan­ions. It was a sim­ple quad­ran­gu­lar pyra­mid, set on a coral base, with no iron­work to tempt the na­tives’ avarice.</p>
				<p>Then Du­mont d’Urville tried to de­part; but his crews were run down from the fevers rag­ing on these un­san­i­tary shores, and quite ill him­self, he was un­able to weigh an­chor un­til March 17.</p>
				<p>Mean­while, fear­ing that Du­mont d’Urville wasn’t abreast of Dil­lon’s ac­tiv­i­ties, the French gov­ern­ment sent a sloop of war to Vanikoro, the Bay­on­naise un­der Com­man­der Le­goarant de Tromelin, who had been sta­tioned on the Amer­i­can west coast. Drop­ping an­chor be­fore Vanikoro a few months af­ter the new <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Astro­labe</i>’s de­par­ture, the Bay­on­naise didn’t find any ad­di­tional ev­i­dence but ver­i­fied that the sav­ages hadn’t dis­turbed the memo­rial hon­or­ing the Count de La Pérouse.</p>
				<p>This is the sub­stance of the ac­count I gave Cap­tain Nemo.</p>
				<p>“So,” he said to me, “the cast­aways built a third ship on Vanikoro Is­land, and to this day, no­body knows where it went and per­ished?”</p>
				<p>“No­body knows.”</p>
				<p>Cap­tain Nemo didn’t re­ply but sig­naled me to fol­low him to the main lounge. The <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i> sank a few me­ters be­neath the waves, and the pan­els opened.</p>
				<p>I rushed to the win­dow and saw crusts of coral: fun­gus coral, siphonula coral, al­cyon coral, sea anemone from the genus <i epub:type="z3998:taxonomy">Caryophylia</i>, plus myr­i­ads of charm­ing fish in­clud­ing green­fish, dam­selfish, sweep­ers, snap­pers, and squir­relfish; un­der­neath this coral cov­er­ing I de­tected some rub­ble the old dredges hadn’t been able to tear free—iron stir­rups, an­chors, can­nons, shells, tackle from a cap­stan, a stem­post, all ob­jects hail­ing from the wrecked ships and now car­peted in mov­ing flow­ers.</p>
				<p>And as I stared at this des­o­late wreck­age, Cap­tain Nemo told me in a solemn voice:</p>
				<p>“Com­man­der La Pérouse set out on De­cem­ber 7, 1785, with his ships, the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Com­pass</i> and the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Astro­labe</i>. He dropped an­chor first at Botany Bay, vis­ited the Tonga Is­lands and New Cale­do­nia, headed to­ward the Santa Cruz Is­lands, and put in at No­muka, one of the is­lands in the Ha’apai group. Then his ships ar­rived at the un­known reefs of Vanikoro. Trav­el­ing in the lead, the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Com­pass</i> ran afoul of break­ers on the southerly coast. The <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Astro­labe</i> went to its res­cue and also ran aground. The first ship was de­stroyed al­most im­me­di­ately. The sec­ond, stranded to lee­ward, held up for some days. The na­tives gave the cast­aways a fair enough wel­come. The lat­ter took up res­i­dence on the is­land and built a smaller craft with rub­ble from the two large ones. A few sea­men stayed vol­un­tar­ily in Vanikoro. The oth­ers, weak and ail­ing, set sail with the Count de La Pérouse. They headed to the Solomon Is­lands, and they per­ished with all hands on the west­erly coast of the chief is­land in that group, be­tween Cape De­cep­tion and Cape Sat­is­fac­tion!”</p>
				<p>“And how do you know all this?” I ex­claimed.</p>
				<p>“Here’s what I found at the very site of that fi­nal ship­wreck!”</p>
				<p>Cap­tain Nemo showed me a tin box, stamped with the coat of arms of France and all cor­roded by salt wa­ter. He opened it and I saw a bun­dle of pa­pers, yel­lowed but still leg­i­ble.</p>
				<p>They were the ac­tual mil­i­tary or­ders given by France’s Min­is­ter of the Navy to Com­man­der La Pérouse, with notes along the mar­gin in the hand­writ­ing of King Louis <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XVI</span>!</p>
				<p>“Ah, what a splen­did death for a sea­man!” Cap­tain Nemo then said. “A coral grave is a tran­quil grave, and may Heaven grant that my com­pan­ions and I rest in no other!”</p>
			</section>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
