<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="en-US" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: http://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Chapter 21</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="part-2" epub:type="part">
			<section id="chapter-2-21" epub:type="chapter">
				<h3 epub:type="title">
					<span class="first-child" epub:type="z3998:roman">XXI</span>
					<span class="epub-type-subtitle" epub:type="subtitle">A Mass Execution</span>
				</h3>
				<p>The way he said this, the un­ex­pect­ed­ness of this scene, first the bi­og­ra­phy of this pa­tri­otic ship, then the ex­cite­ment with which this ec­cen­tric in­di­vid­ual pro­nounced these last words—the name <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Avenger</i> whose sig­nif­i­cance could not es­cape me—all this, taken to­gether, had a pro­found im­pact on my mind. My eyes never left the cap­tain. Hands out­stretched to­ward the sea, he con­tem­plated the proud wreck with blaz­ing eyes. Per­haps I would never learn who he was, where he came from or where he was head­ing, but more and more I could see a dis­tinc­tion be­tween the man and the sci­en­tist. It was no or­di­nary mis­an­thropy that kept Cap­tain Nemo and his com­pan­ions se­questered in­side the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i>’s plat­ing, but a hate so mon­strous or so sub­lime that the pass­ing years could never weaken it.</p>
				<p>Did this hate also hunger for vengeance? Time would soon tell.</p>
				<p>Mean­while the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i> rose slowly to the sur­face of the sea, and I watched the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Avenger</i>’s murky shape dis­ap­pear­ing lit­tle by lit­tle. Soon a gen­tle rolling told me that we were afloat in the open air.</p>
				<p>Just then a hol­low ex­plo­sion was au­di­ble. I looked at the cap­tain. The cap­tain did not stir.</p>
				<p>“Cap­tain?” I said.</p>
				<p>He didn’t re­ply.</p>
				<p>I left him and climbed onto the plat­form. Con­seil and the Cana­dian were al­ready there.</p>
				<p>“What caused that ex­plo­sion?” I asked.</p>
				<p>“A can­non go­ing off,” Ned Land replied.</p>
				<p>I stared in the di­rec­tion of the ship I had spot­ted. It was head­ing to­ward the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i>, and you could tell it had put on steam. Six miles sep­a­rated it from us.</p>
				<p>“What sort of craft is it, Ned?”</p>
				<p>“From its rig­ging and its low masts,” the Cana­dian replied, “I bet it’s a war­ship. Here’s hop­ing it pulls up and sinks this damned <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i>!”</p>
				<p>“Ned my friend,” Con­seil replied, “what harm could it do the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i>? Will it at­tack us un­der the waves? Will it can­non­ade us at the bot­tom of the sea?”</p>
				<p>“Tell me, Ned,” I asked, “can you make out the na­tion­al­ity of that craft?”</p>
				<p>Creas­ing his brow, low­er­ing his lids, and puck­er­ing the cor­ners of his eyes, the Cana­dian fo­cused the full power of his gaze on the ship for a short while.</p>
				<p>“No, sir,” he replied. “I can’t make out what na­tion it’s from. It’s fly­ing no flag. But I’ll swear it’s a war­ship, be­cause there’s a long pen­nant stream­ing from the peak of its main­mast.”</p>
				<p>For a quar­ter of an hour, we con­tin­ued to watch the craft bear­ing down on us. But it was in­con­ceiv­able to me that it had dis­cov­ered the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i> at such a dis­tance, still less that it knew what this un­der­wa­ter ma­chine re­ally was.</p>
				<p>Soon the Cana­dian an­nounced that the craft was a big bat­tle­ship, a dou­ble-decker iron­clad com­plete with ram. Dark, dense smoke burst from its two fun­nels. Its furled sails merged with the lines of its yardarms. The gaff of its fore-and-aft sail flew no flag. Its dis­tance still kept us from dis­tin­guish­ing the col­ors of its pen­nant, which was flut­ter­ing like a thin rib­bon.</p>
				<p>It was com­ing on fast. If Cap­tain Nemo let it ap­proach, a chance for sal­va­tion might be avail­able to us.</p>
				<p>“Sir,” Ned Land told me, “if that boat gets within a mile of us, I’m jump­ing over­board, and I sug­gest you fol­low suit.”</p>
				<p>I didn’t re­ply to the Cana­dian’s propo­si­tion but kept watch­ing the ship, which was loom­ing larger on the hori­zon. Whether it was English, French, Amer­i­can, or Rus­sian, it would surely wel­come us aboard if we could just get to it.</p>
				<p>“Master may re­call,” Con­seil then said, “that we have some ex­pe­ri­ence with swim­ming. He can rely on me to tow him to that ves­sel, if he’s agree­able to go­ing with our friend Ned.”</p>
				<p>Be­fore I could re­ply, white smoke streamed from the bat­tle­ship’s bow. Then, a few sec­onds later, the wa­ters splashed astern of the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i>, dis­turbed by the fall of a heavy ob­ject. Soon af­ter, an ex­plo­sion struck my ears.</p>
				<p>“What’s this? They’re fir­ing at us!” I ex­claimed.</p>
				<p>“Good lads!” the Cana­dian mut­tered.</p>
				<p>“That means they don’t see us as cast­aways cling­ing to some wreck­age!”</p>
				<p>“With all due re­spect to mas­ter—gra­cious!” Con­seil put in, shak­ing off the wa­ter that had sprayed over him from an­other shell. “With all due re­spect to mas­ter, they’ve dis­cov­ered the nar­whale and they’re can­nonad­ing the same.”</p>
				<p>“But it must be clear to them,” I ex­claimed, “that they’re deal­ing with hu­man be­ings.”</p>
				<p>“Maybe that’s why!” Ned Land replied, star­ing hard at me.</p>
				<p>The full truth dawned on me. Un­doubt­edly peo­ple now knew where they stood on the ex­is­tence of this so-called mon­ster. Un­doubt­edly the lat­ter’s en­counter with the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Abra­ham Lin­coln</i>, when the Cana­dian hit it with his har­poon, had led Com­man­der Far­ragut to rec­og­nize the nar­whale as ac­tu­ally an un­der­wa­ter boat, more dan­ger­ous than any un­earthly cetacean!</p>
				<p>Yes, this had to be the case, and un­doubt­edly they were now chas­ing this dread­ful en­gine of de­struc­tion on ev­ery sea!</p>
				<p>Dread­ful in­deed, if, as we could as­sume, Cap­tain Nemo had been us­ing the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i> in works of vengeance! That night in the mid­dle of the In­dian Ocean, when he im­pris­oned us in the cell, hadn’t he at­tacked some ship? That man now buried in the coral ceme­tery, wasn’t he the vic­tim of some col­li­sion caused by the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i>? Yes, I re­peat: this had to be the case. One part of Cap­tain Nemo’s se­cret life had been un­veiled. And now, even though his iden­tity was still un­known, at least the na­tions al­lied against him knew they were no longer hunt­ing some fairy­tale mon­ster, but a man who had sworn an im­pla­ca­ble hate to­ward them!</p>
				<p>This whole fear­some se­quence of events ap­peared in my mind’s eye. In­stead of en­coun­ter­ing friends on this ap­proach­ing ship, we would find only piti­less en­e­mies.</p>
				<p>Mean­while shells fell around us in in­creas­ing num­bers. Some, meet­ing the liq­uid sur­face, would ric­o­chet and van­ish into the sea at con­sid­er­able dis­tances. But none of them reached the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i>.</p>
				<p>By then the iron­clad was no more than three miles off. De­spite its vi­o­lent can­non­ade, Cap­tain Nemo hadn’t ap­peared on the plat­form. And yet if one of those con­i­cal shells had scored a rou­tine hit on the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i>’s hull, it could have been fa­tal to him.</p>
				<p>The Cana­dian then told me:</p>
				<p>“Sir, we’ve got to do ev­ery­thing we can to get out of this jam! Let’s sig­nal them! Dam­na­tion! Maybe they’ll re­al­ize we’re de­cent peo­ple!”</p>
				<p>Ned Land pulled out his hand­ker­chief to wave it in the air. But he had barely un­folded it when he was felled by an iron fist, and de­spite his great strength, he tum­bled to the deck.</p>
				<p>“Scum!” the cap­tain shouted. “Do you want to be nailed to the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i>’s spur be­fore it charges that ship?”</p>
				<p>Dread­ful to hear, Cap­tain Nemo was even more dread­ful to see. His face was pale from some spasm of his heart, which must have stopped beat­ing for an in­stant. His pupils were hideously con­tracted. His voice was no longer speak­ing, it was bel­low­ing. Bend­ing from the waist, he shook the Cana­dian by the shoul­ders.</p>
				<p>Then, drop­ping Ned and turn­ing to the bat­tle­ship, whose shells were show­er­ing around him:</p>
				<p>“O ship of an ac­cursed na­tion, you know who I am!” he shouted in his pow­er­ful voice. “And I don’t need your col­ors to rec­og­nize you! Look! I’ll show you mine!”</p>
				<p>And in the bow of the plat­form, Cap­tain Nemo un­furled a black flag, like the one he had left planted at the South Pole.</p>
				<p>Just then a shell hit the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i>’s hull obliquely, failed to breach it, ric­o­cheted near the cap­tain, and van­ished into the sea.</p>
				<p>Cap­tain Nemo shrugged his shoul­ders. Then, ad­dress­ing me:</p>
				<p>“Go be­low!” he told me in a curt tone. “You and your com­pan­ions, go be­low!”</p>
				<p>“Sir,” I ex­claimed, “are you go­ing to at­tack this ship?”</p>
				<p>“Sir, I’m go­ing to sink it.”</p>
				<p>“You wouldn’t!”</p>
				<p>“I will,” Cap­tain Nemo replied icily. “You’re ill-ad­vised to pass judg­ment on me, sir. Fate has shown you what you weren’t meant to see. The at­tack has come. Our re­ply will be dread­ful. Get back in­side!”</p>
				<p>“From what coun­try is that ship?”</p>
				<p>“You don’t know? Fine, so much the bet­ter! At least its na­tion­al­ity will re­main a se­cret to you. Go be­low!”</p>
				<p>The Cana­dian, Con­seil, and I could only obey. Some fif­teen of the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i>’s sea­men sur­rounded their cap­tain and stared with a feel­ing of im­pla­ca­ble hate at the ship bear­ing down on them. You could feel the same spirit of vengeance enkin­dling their ev­ery soul.</p>
				<p>I went be­low just as an­other pro­jec­tile scraped the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i>’s hull, and I heard the cap­tain ex­claim:</p>
				<p>“Shoot, you de­mented ves­sel! Shower your fu­tile shells! You won’t es­cape the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i>’s spur! But this isn’t the place where you’ll per­ish! I don’t want your wreck­age min­gling with that of the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Avenger</i>!”</p>
				<p>I re­paired to my state­room. The cap­tain and his chief of­fi­cer stayed on the plat­form. The pro­pel­ler was set in mo­tion. The <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i> swiftly re­treated, putting us out­side the range of the ves­sel’s shells. But the chase con­tin­ued, and Cap­tain Nemo was con­tent to keep his dis­tance.</p>
				<p>Near four o’clock in the af­ter­noon, un­able to con­trol the im­pa­tience and un­easi­ness de­vour­ing me, I went back to the cen­tral com­pan­ion­way. The hatch was open. I ven­tured onto the plat­form. The cap­tain was still strolling there, his steps ag­i­tated. He stared at the ship, which stayed to his lee­ward five or six miles off. He was cir­cling it like a wild beast, draw­ing it east­ward, let­ting it chase af­ter him. Yet he didn’t at­tack. Was he, per­haps, still un­de­cided?</p>
				<p>I tried to in­ter­vene one last time. But I had barely queried Cap­tain Nemo when the lat­ter si­lenced me:</p>
				<p>“I’m the law, I’m the tri­bunal! I’m the op­pressed, and there are my op­pres­sors! Thanks to them, I’ve wit­nessed the de­struc­tion of ev­ery­thing I loved, cher­ished, and ven­er­ated—home­land, wife, chil­dren, fa­ther, and mother! There lies ev­ery­thing I hate! Not an­other word out of you!”</p>
				<p>I took a last look at the bat­tle­ship, which was putting on steam. Then I re­joined Ned and Con­seil.</p>
				<p>“We’ll es­cape!” I ex­claimed.</p>
				<p>“Good,” Ned put in. “Where’s that ship from?”</p>
				<p>“I’ve no idea. But wher­ever it’s from, it will sink be­fore night­fall. In any event, it’s bet­ter to per­ish with it than be ac­com­plices in some act of re­venge whose mer­its we can’t gauge.”</p>
				<p>“That’s my feel­ing,” Ned Land replied coolly. “Let’s wait for night­fall.”</p>
				<p>Night fell. A pro­found si­lence reigned on board. The com­pass in­di­cated that the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i> hadn’t changed di­rec­tion. I could hear the beat of its pro­pel­ler, churn­ing the waves with steady speed. Stay­ing on the sur­face of the wa­ter, it rolled gen­tly, some­times to one side, some­times to the other.</p>
				<p>My com­pan­ions and I had de­cided to es­cape as soon as the ves­sel came close enough for us to be heard—or seen, be­cause the moon would wax full in three days and was shin­ing brightly. Once we were aboard that ship, if we couldn’t ward off the blow that threat­ened it, at least we could do ev­ery­thing that cir­cum­stances per­mit­ted. Sev­eral times I thought the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i> was about to at­tack. But it was con­tent to let its ad­ver­sary ap­proach, and then it would quickly re­sume its re­treat­ing ways.</p>
				<p>Part of the night passed with­out in­ci­dent. We kept watch for an op­por­tu­nity to take ac­tion. We talked lit­tle, be­ing too keyed up. Ned Land was all for jump­ing over­board. I forced him to wait. As I saw it, the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i> would at­tack the dou­ble-decker on the sur­face of the waves, and then it would be not only pos­si­ble but easy to es­cape.</p>
				<p>At three o’clock in the morn­ing, full of un­easi­ness, I climbed onto the plat­form. Cap­tain Nemo hadn’t left it. He stood in the bow next to his flag, which a mild breeze was un­furl­ing above his head. His eyes never left that ves­sel. The ex­tra­or­di­nary in­ten­sity of his gaze seemed to at­tract it, be­guile it, and draw it more surely than if he had it in tow!</p>
				<p>The moon then passed its zenith. Jupiter was ris­ing in the east. In the midst of this placid nat­u­ral set­ting, sky and ocean com­peted with each other in tran­quil­ity, and the sea of­fered the orb of night the loveli­est mir­ror ever to re­flect its im­age.</p>
				<p>And when I com­pared this deep calm of the el­e­ments with all the fury seething in­side the plat­ing of this barely per­cep­ti­ble <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i>, I shiv­ered all over.</p>
				<p>The ves­sel was two miles off. It drew nearer, al­ways mov­ing to­ward the phos­pho­res­cent glow that sig­naled the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i>’s pres­ence. I saw its green and red run­ning lights, plus the white lantern hang­ing from the large stay of its fore­mast. Hazy flick­er­ings were re­flected on its rig­ging and in­di­cated that its fur­naces were pushed to the limit. Show­ers of sparks and cin­ders of flam­ing coal es­caped from its fun­nels, span­gling the air with stars.</p>
				<p>I stood there un­til six o’clock in the morn­ing, Cap­tain Nemo never seem­ing to no­tice me. The ves­sel lay a mile and a half off, and with the first glim­mers of day­light, it re­sumed its can­non­ade. The time couldn’t be far away when the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i> would at­tack its ad­ver­sary, and my com­pan­ions and I would leave for­ever this man I dared not judge.</p>
				<p>I was about to go be­low to alert them, when the chief of­fi­cer climbed onto the plat­form. Sev­eral sea­men were with him. Cap­tain Nemo didn’t see them, or didn’t want to see them. They car­ried out cer­tain pro­ce­dures that, on the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i>, you could call “clear­ing the decks for ac­tion.” They were quite sim­ple. The man­ropes that formed a handrail around the plat­form were low­ered. Like­wise the pi­lot­house and the bea­con hous­ing were with­drawn into the hull un­til they lay ex­actly flush with it. The sur­face of this long sheet-iron cigar no longer of­fered a sin­gle pro­tru­sion that could ham­per its ma­neu­vers.</p>
				<p>I re­turned to the lounge. The <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i> still emerged above the sur­face. A few morn­ing gleams in­fil­trated the liq­uid strata. Be­neath the un­du­la­tions of the bil­lows, the win­dows were en­livened by the blush­ing of the ris­ing sun. That dread­ful day of June 2 had dawned.</p>
				<p>At seven o’clock the log told me that the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i> had re­duced speed. I re­al­ized that it was let­ting the war­ship ap­proach. More­over, the ex­plo­sions grew more in­tensely au­di­ble. Shells fur­rowed the wa­ter around us, drilling through it with an odd hiss­ing sound.</p>
				<p>“My friends,” I said, “it’s time. Let’s shake hands, and may God be with us!”</p>
				<p>Ned Land was de­ter­mined, Con­seil calm, I my­self ner­vous and barely in con­trol.</p>
				<p>We went into the li­brary. Just as I pushed open the door lead­ing to the well of the cen­tral com­pan­ion­way, I heard the hatch close sharply over­head.</p>
				<p>The Cana­dian leaped up the steps, but I stopped him. A well-known hiss­ing told me that wa­ter was en­ter­ing the ship’s bal­last tanks. In­deed, in a few mo­ments the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i> had sub­merged some me­ters be­low the sur­face of the waves.</p>
				<p>I un­der­stood this ma­neu­ver. It was too late to take ac­tion. The <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i> wasn’t go­ing to strike the dou­ble-decker where it was clad in im­pen­e­tra­ble iron ar­mor, but be­low its wa­ter­line, where the metal cara­pace no longer pro­tected its plank­ing.</p>
				<p>We were pris­on­ers once more, un­will­ing spec­ta­tors at the per­for­mance of this grue­some drama. But we barely had time to think. Tak­ing refuge in my state­room, we stared at each other with­out pro­nounc­ing a word. My mind was in a to­tal daze. My men­tal pro­cesses came to a dead stop. I hov­ered in that painful state that pre­dom­i­nates dur­ing the pe­riod of an­tic­i­pa­tion be­fore some fright­ful ex­plo­sion. I waited, I lis­tened, I lived only through my sense of hear­ing!</p>
				<p>Mean­while the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i>’s speed had in­creased ap­pre­cia­bly. So it was gath­er­ing mo­men­tum. Its en­tire hull was vi­brat­ing.</p>
				<p>Sud­denly I let out a yell. There had been a col­li­sion, but it was com­par­a­tively mild. I could feel the pen­e­trat­ing force of the steel spur. I could hear scratch­ings and scrap­ings. Car­ried away with its driv­ing power, the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i> had passed through the ves­sel’s mass like a sail­maker’s nee­dle through can­vas!</p>
				<p>I couldn’t hold still. Fran­tic, go­ing in­sane, I leaped out of my state­room and rushed into the lounge.</p>
				<p>Cap­tain Nemo was there. Mute, gloomy, im­pla­ca­ble, he was star­ing through the port panel.</p>
				<p>An enor­mous mass was sink­ing be­neath the wa­ters, and the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i>, miss­ing none of its death throes, was de­scend­ing into the depths with it. Ten me­ters away, I could see its gap­ing hull, into which wa­ter was rush­ing with a sound of thun­der, then its dou­ble rows of can­nons and rail­ings. Its deck was cov­ered with dark, quiv­er­ing shad­ows.</p>
				<p>The wa­ter was ris­ing. Those poor men leaped up into the shrouds, clung to the masts, writhed be­neath the wa­ters. It was a hu­man anthill that an in­vad­ing sea had caught by sur­prise!</p>
				<p>Par­a­lyzed, rigid with an­guish, my hair stand­ing on end, my eyes pop­ping out of my head, short of breath, suf­fo­cat­ing, speech­less, I stared—I too! I was glued to the win­dow by an ir­re­sistible al­lure!</p>
				<p>The enor­mous ves­sel set­tled slowly. Fol­low­ing it down, the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i> kept watch on its ev­ery move­ment. Sud­denly there was an erup­tion. The air com­pressed in­side the craft sent its decks fly­ing, as if the pow­der stores had been ig­nited. The thrust of the wa­ters was so great, the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i> swerved away.</p>
				<p>The poor ship then sank more swiftly. Its mast­heads ap­peared, laden with vic­tims, then its crosstrees bend­ing un­der clus­ters of men, fi­nally the peak of its main­mast. Then the dark mass dis­ap­peared, and with it a crew of corpses dragged un­der by fear­some ed­dies. …</p>
				<p>I turned to Cap­tain Nemo. This dread­ful ex­e­cu­tioner, this true archangel of hate, was still star­ing. When it was all over, Cap­tain Nemo headed to the door of his state­room, opened it, and en­tered. I fol­lowed him with my eyes.</p>
				<p>On the rear pan­el­ing, be­neath the por­traits of his he­roes, I saw the por­trait of a still-youth­ful woman with two lit­tle chil­dren. Cap­tain Nemo stared at them for a few mo­ments, stretched out his arms to them, sank to his knees, and melted into sobs.</p>
			</section>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
