<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="en-US" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: http://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Chapter 11</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="part-1" epub:type="part">
			<section id="chapter-1-11" epub:type="chapter">
				<h3 epub:type="title">
					<span class="first-child" epub:type="z3998:roman">XI</span>
					<span class="epub-type-subtitle" epub:type="subtitle">The <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nautilus</i></span>
				</h3>
				<p>Cap­tain Nemo stood up. I fol­lowed him. Con­trived at the rear of the din­ing room, a dou­ble door opened, and I en­tered a room whose di­men­sions equaled the one I had just left.</p>
				<p>It was a li­brary. Tall, black-rose­wood book­cases, in­laid with cop­per­work, held on their wide shelves a large num­ber of uni­formly bound books. Th­ese fur­nish­ings fol­lowed the con­tours of the room, their lower parts lead­ing to huge couches up­hol­stered in ma­roon leather and curved for max­i­mum com­fort. Light, mov­able read­ing stands, which could be pushed away or pulled near as de­sired, al­lowed books to be po­si­tioned on them for easy study. In the cen­ter stood a huge ta­ble cov­ered with pam­phlets, among which some news­pa­pers, long out of date, were vis­i­ble. Elec­tric light flooded this whole har­mo­nious to­tal­ity, fall­ing from four frosted half globes set in the scroll­work of the ceil­ing. I stared in gen­uine won­der­ment at this room so in­ge­niously laid out, and I couldn’t be­lieve my eyes.</p>
				<p>“Cap­tain Nemo,” I told my host, who had just stretched out on a couch, “this is a li­brary that would do credit to more than one con­ti­nen­tal palace, and I truly mar­vel to think it can go with you into the deep­est seas.”</p>
				<p>“Where could one find greater si­lence or soli­tude, pro­fes­sor?” Cap­tain Nemo replied. “Did your study at the mu­seum af­ford you such a per­fect re­treat?”</p>
				<p>“No, sir, and I might add that it’s quite a hum­ble one next to yours. You own 6,000 or 7,000 vol­umes here …”</p>
				<p>“12,000, Pro­fes­sor Aron­nax. They’re my sole re­main­ing ties with dry land. But I was done with the shore the day my <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i> sub­merged for the first time un­der the wa­ters. That day I pur­chased my last vol­umes, my last pam­phlets, my last news­pa­pers, and ever since I’ve cho­sen to be­lieve that hu­man­ity no longer thinks or writes. In any event, pro­fes­sor, these books are at your dis­posal, and you may use them freely.”</p>
				<p>I thanked Cap­tain Nemo and ap­proached the shelves of this li­brary. Writ­ten in ev­ery lan­guage, books on sci­ence, ethics, and lit­er­a­ture were there in abun­dance, but I didn’t see a sin­gle work on eco­nom­ics—they seemed to be strictly banned on board. One odd de­tail: all these books were shelved in­dis­crim­i­nately with­out re­gard to the lan­guage in which they were writ­ten, and this jum­ble proved that the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i>’s cap­tain could read flu­ently what­ever vol­umes he chanced to pick up.</p>
				<p>Among these books I noted mas­ter­pieces by the greats of an­cient and mod­ern times, in other words, all of hu­man­ity’s finest achieve­ments in his­tory, po­etry, fic­tion, and sci­ence, from Homer to Vic­tor Hugo, from Xenophon to Michelet, from Ra­belais to Madame Ge­orge Sand. But sci­ence, in par­tic­u­lar, rep­re­sented the ma­jor in­vest­ment of this li­brary: books on me­chan­ics, bal­lis­tics, hy­drog­ra­phy, me­te­o­rol­ogy, ge­og­ra­phy, ge­ol­ogy, etc., held a place there no less im­por­tant than works on nat­u­ral his­tory, and I re­al­ized that they made up the cap­tain’s chief read­ing. There I saw the com­plete works of Hum­boldt, the com­plete Arago, as well as works by Fou­cault, Henri Sainte-Claire Deville, Chasles, Milne-Ed­wards, Qu­a­tre­fages, John Tyn­dall, Fara­day, Berth­elot, Father Sec­chi, Peter­mann, Com­man­der Maury, Louis Agas­siz, etc., plus the trans­ac­tions of France’s Academy of Sciences, bul­letins from the var­i­ous ge­o­graph­i­cal so­ci­eties, etc., and in a prime lo­ca­tion, those two vol­umes on the great ocean depths that had per­haps earned me this com­par­a­tively char­i­ta­ble wel­come from Cap­tain Nemo. Among the works of Joseph Ber­trand, his book en­ti­tled <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">The Founders of Astron­omy</i> even gave me a def­i­nite date; and since I knew it had ap­peared in the course of 1865, I con­cluded that the fit­ting out of the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i> hadn’t taken place be­fore then. Ac­cord­ingly, three years ago at the most, Cap­tain Nemo had be­gun his un­der­wa­ter ex­is­tence. More­over, I hoped some books even more re­cent would per­mit me to pin­point the date pre­cisely; but I had plenty of time to look for them, and I didn’t want to put off any longer our stroll through the won­ders of the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i>.</p>
				<p>“Sir,” I told the cap­tain, “thank you for plac­ing this li­brary at my dis­posal. There are sci­en­tific trea­sures here, and I’ll take ad­van­tage of them.”</p>
				<p>“This room isn’t only a li­brary,” Cap­tain Nemo said, “it’s also a smok­ing room.”</p>
				<p>“A smok­ing room?” I ex­claimed. “Then one may smoke on board?”</p>
				<p>“Surely.”</p>
				<p>“In that case, sir, I’m forced to be­lieve that you’ve kept up re­la­tions with Ha­vana.”</p>
				<p>“None what­ever,” the cap­tain replied. “Try this cigar, Pro­fes­sor Aron­nax, and even though it doesn’t come from Ha­vana, it will sat­isfy you if you’re a con­nois­seur.”</p>
				<p>I took the cigar of­fered me, whose shape re­called those from Cuba; but it seemed to be made of gold leaf. I lit it at a small bra­zier sup­ported by an el­e­gant bronze stand, and I in­haled my first whiffs with the rel­ish of a smoker who hasn’t had a puff in days.</p>
				<p>“It’s ex­cel­lent,” I said, “but it’s not from the to­bacco plant.”</p>
				<p>“Right,” the cap­tain replied, “this to­bacco comes from nei­ther Ha­vana nor the Ori­ent. It’s a kind of nico­tine-rich sea­weed that the ocean sup­plies me, al­beit spar­ingly. Do you still miss your Cubans, sir?”</p>
				<p>“Cap­tain, I scorn them from this day for­ward.”</p>
				<p>“Then smoke these cigars when­ever you like, with­out de­bat­ing their ori­gin. They bear no gov­ern­ment seal of ap­proval, but I imag­ine they’re none the worse for it.”</p>
				<p>“On the con­trary.”</p>
				<p>Just then Cap­tain Nemo opened a door fac­ing the one by which I had en­tered the li­brary, and I passed into an im­mense, splen­didly lit lounge.</p>
				<p>It was a huge quadri­lat­eral with canted cor­ners, ten me­ters long, six wide, five high. A lu­mi­nous ceil­ing, dec­o­rated with del­i­cate arabesques, dis­trib­uted a soft, clear day­light over all the won­ders gath­ered in this mu­seum. For a mu­seum it truly was, in which clever hands had spared no ex­pense to amass ev­ery nat­u­ral and artis­tic trea­sure, dis­play­ing them with the hel­ter-skel­ter pic­turesque­ness that dis­tin­guishes a painter’s stu­dio.</p>
				<p>Some thirty pic­tures by the mas­ters, uni­formly framed and sep­a­rated by gleam­ing panoplies of arms, adorned walls on which were stretched ta­pes­tries of aus­tere de­sign. There I saw can­vases of the high­est value, the likes of which I had mar­veled at in pri­vate Euro­pean col­lec­tions and art ex­hi­bi­tions. The var­i­ous schools of the old mas­ters were rep­re­sented by a Raphael Madonna, a Vir­gin by Leonardo da Vinci, a nymph by Cor­reg­gio, a woman by Ti­tian, an ado­ra­tion of the Magi by Veronese, an as­sump­tion of the Vir­gin by Murillo, a Hol­bein por­trait, a monk by Ve­lazquez, a mar­tyr by Rib­era, a vil­lage fair by Rubens, two Flem­ish land­scapes by Te­niers, three lit­tle genre paint­ings by Ger­ard Dow, Metsu, and Paul Pot­ter, two can­vases by Ger­i­cault and Prud’hon, plus seascapes by Back­huy­sen and Ver­net. Among the works of mod­ern art were pic­tures signed by Delacroix, In­gres, De­camps, Troyon, Meis­sonier, Daubigny, etc., and some won­der­ful minia­ture stat­ues in mar­ble or bronze, mod­eled af­ter an­tiq­uity’s finest orig­i­nals, stood on their pedestals in the cor­ners of this mag­nif­i­cent mu­seum. As the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i>’s com­man­der had pre­dicted, my mind was al­ready start­ing to fall into that promised state of stunned amaze­ment.</p>
				<p>“Pro­fes­sor,” this strange man then said, “you must ex­cuse the in­for­mal­ity with which I re­ceive you, and the dis­or­der reign­ing in this lounge.”</p>
				<p>“Sir,” I replied, “with­out pry­ing into who you are, might I ven­ture to iden­tify you as an artist?”</p>
				<p>“A col­lec­tor, sir, noth­ing more. Formerly I loved ac­quir­ing these beau­ti­ful works cre­ated by the hand of man. I sought them greed­ily, fer­reted them out tire­lessly, and I’ve been able to gather some ob­jects of great value. They’re my last me­men­tos of those shores that are now dead for me. In my eyes, your mod­ern artists are al­ready as old as the an­cients. They’ve ex­isted for 2,000 or 3,000 years, and I mix them up in my mind. The mas­ters are age­less.”</p>
				<p>“What about these com­posers?” I said, point­ing to sheet mu­sic by We­ber, Rossini, Mozart, Beethoven, Haydn, Meyer­beer, Hérold, Wag­ner, Au­ber, Gounod, Vic­tor Massé, and a num­ber of oth­ers scat­tered over a full size pi­ano-or­gan, which oc­cu­pied one of the wall pan­els in this lounge.</p>
				<p>“Th­ese com­posers,” Cap­tain Nemo an­swered me, “are the con­tem­po­raries of Or­pheus, be­cause in the an­nals of the dead, all chrono­log­i­cal dif­fer­ences fade; and I’m dead, pro­fes­sor, quite as dead as those friends of yours sleep­ing six feet un­der!”</p>
				<p>Cap­tain Nemo fell silent and seemed lost in reverie. I re­garded him with in­tense ex­cite­ment, silently an­a­lyz­ing his strange fa­cial ex­pres­sion. Lean­ing his el­bow on the cor­ner of a valu­able mo­saic ta­ble, he no longer saw me, he had for­got­ten my very pres­ence.</p>
				<p>I didn’t dis­turb his med­i­ta­tions but con­tin­ued to pass in re­view the cu­riosi­ties that en­riched this lounge.</p>
				<p>After the works of art, nat­u­ral rar­i­ties pre­dom­i­nated. They con­sisted chiefly of plants, shells, and other ex­hibits from the ocean that must have been Cap­tain Nemo’s own per­sonal finds. In the mid­dle of the lounge, a jet of wa­ter, elec­tri­cally lit, fell back into a basin made from a sin­gle gi­ant clam. The del­i­cately fes­tooned rim of this shell, sup­plied by the big­gest mol­lusk in the class <i epub:type="z3998:taxonomy">Acephala</i>, mea­sured about six me­ters in cir­cum­fer­ence; so it was even big­ger than those fine gi­ant clams given to King François <span epub:type="z3998:roman">I</span> by the Repub­lic of Venice, and which the Church of Saint-Sulpice in Paris has made into two gi­gan­tic holy-wa­ter fonts.</p>
				<p>Around this basin, in­side el­e­gant glass cases fas­tened with cop­per bands, there were clas­si­fied and la­beled the most valu­able ma­rine ex­hibits ever put be­fore the eyes of a nat­u­ral­ist. My pro­fes­so­rial glee may eas­ily be imag­ined.</p>
				<p>The zoophyte branch of­fered some very un­usual spec­i­mens from its two groups, the polyps and the echin­o­derms. In the first group: or­gan-pipe coral, gor­gonian coral ar­ranged into fan shapes, soft sponges from Syria, isis coral from the Molucca Is­lands, sea-pen coral, won­der­ful coral of the genus <i epub:type="z3998:taxonomy">Vir­gu­laria</i> from the wa­ters of Nor­way, var­i­ous coral of the genus <i epub:type="z3998:taxonomy">Um­bel­lu­laria</i>, al­cy­onar­ian coral, then a whole se­ries of those madrepores that my men­tor Pro­fes­sor Milne-Ed­wards has so shrewdly clas­si­fied into di­vi­sions and among which I noted the won­der­ful genus <i epub:type="z3998:taxonomy">Fla­bel­lina</i> as well as the genus <i epub:type="z3998:taxonomy">Oculina</i> from Réu­nion Is­land, plus a “Nep­tune’s char­iot” from the Caribbean Sea—ev­ery su­perb va­ri­ety of coral, and in short, ev­ery species of these un­usual poly­paries that con­gre­gate to form en­tire is­lands that will one day turn into con­ti­nents. Among the echin­o­derms, no­table for be­ing cov­ered with spines: starfish, feather stars, sea lilies, free-swim­ming crinoids, brit­tle stars, sea urchins, sea cu­cum­bers, etc., rep­re­sented a com­plete col­lec­tion of the in­di­vid­u­als in this group.</p>
				<p>An ex­citable con­chol­o­gist would surely have fainted dead away be­fore other, more nu­mer­ous glass cases in which were clas­si­fied spec­i­mens from the mol­lusk branch. There I saw a col­lec­tion of in­cal­cu­la­ble value that I haven’t time to de­scribe com­pletely. Among these ex­hibits I’ll men­tion, just for the record: an el­e­gant royal ham­mer shell from the In­dian Ocean, whose evenly spaced white spots stood out sharply against a base of red and brown; an im­pe­rial spiny oys­ter, brightly col­ored, bristling with thorns, a spec­i­men rare to Euro­pean mu­se­ums, whose value I es­ti­mated at 20,000 francs; a com­mon ham­mer shell from the seas near Queens­land, very hard to come by; ex­otic cock­les from Sene­gal, frag­ile white bi­valve shells that a sin­gle breath could pop like a soap bub­ble; sev­eral va­ri­eties of wa­ter­ing-pot shell from Java, a sort of lime­stone tube fringed with leafy folds and much fought over by col­lec­tors; a whole se­ries of top-shell snails—green­ish yel­low ones fished up from Amer­i­can seas, oth­ers col­ored red­dish brown that pa­tron­ize the wa­ters off Queens­land, the for­mer com­ing from the Gulf of Mex­ico and no­table for their over­lap­ping shells, the lat­ter some sun-car­rier shells found in the south­ern­most seas, fi­nally and rarest of all, the mag­nif­i­cent spurred-star shell from New Zealand; then some won­der­ful pep­pery-fur­row shells; sev­eral valu­able species of cythera clams and venus clams; the trel­lis wentle­trap snail from Tran­que­bar on In­dia’s east­ern shore; a mar­bled tur­ban snail gleam­ing with mother-of-pearl; green par­rot shells from the seas of China; the vir­tu­ally un­known cone snail from the genus <i epub:type="z3998:taxonomy">Coen­odul­lus</i>; ev­ery va­ri­ety of cowry used as money in In­dia and Africa; a “glory-of-the-seas,” the most valu­able shell in the East Indies; fi­nally, com­mon peri­win­kles, del­phin­ula snails, tur­ret snails, vi­o­let snails, Euro­pean cowries, vo­lute snails, olive shells, miter shells, hel­met shells, murex snails, whelks, harp shells, spiky peri­win­kles, tri­ton snails, horn shells, spin­dle shells, conch shells, spi­der conchs, limpets, glass snails, sea but­ter­flies—ev­ery kind of del­i­cate, frag­ile seashell that sci­ence has bap­tized with its most de­light­ful names.</p>
				<p>Aside and in spe­cial com­part­ments, strings of supremely beau­ti­ful pearls were spread out, the elec­tric light fleck­ing them with lit­tle fiery sparks: pink pearls pulled from salt­wa­ter fan shells in the Red Sea; green pearls from the rain­bow abalone; yel­low, blue, and black pearls, the un­usual hand­i­work of var­i­ous mol­lusks from ev­ery ocean and of cer­tain mus­sels from rivers up north; in short, sev­eral spec­i­mens of in­cal­cu­la­ble worth that had been oozed by the rarest of shell­fish. Some of these pearls were big­ger than a pi­geon egg; they more than equaled the one that the ex­plorer Tav­ernier sold the Shah of Per­sia for 3,000,000 francs, and they sur­passed that other pearl owned by the Imam of Mus­cat, which I had be­lieved to be un­ri­valed in the en­tire world.</p>
				<p>Con­se­quently, to cal­cu­late the value of this col­lec­tion was, I should say, im­pos­si­ble. Cap­tain Nemo must have spent mil­lions in ac­quir­ing these dif­fer­ent spec­i­mens, and I was won­der­ing what fi­nan­cial re­sources he tapped to sat­isfy his col­lec­tor’s fan­cies, when these words in­ter­rupted me:</p>
				<p>“You’re ex­am­in­ing my shells, pro­fes­sor? They’re in­deed able to fas­ci­nate a nat­u­ral­ist; but for me they have an added charm, since I’ve col­lected ev­ery one of them with my own two hands, and not a sea on the globe has es­caped my in­ves­ti­ga­tions.”</p>
				<p>“I un­der­stand, cap­tain, I un­der­stand your de­light at strolling in the midst of this wealth. You’re a man who gath­ers his trea­sure in per­son. No mu­seum in Europe owns such a col­lec­tion of ex­hibits from the ocean. But if I ex­haust all my won­der­ment on them, I’ll have noth­ing left for the ship that car­ries them! I have ab­so­lutely no wish to probe those se­crets of yours! But I con­fess that my cu­rios­ity is aroused to the limit by this <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i>, the mo­tor power it con­tains, the equip­ment en­abling it to op­er­ate, the ul­tra pow­er­ful force that brings it to life. I see some in­stru­ments hang­ing on the walls of this lounge whose pur­poses are un­known to me. May I learn—”</p>
				<p>“Pro­fes­sor Aron­nax,” Cap­tain Nemo an­swered me, “I’ve said you’d be free aboard my ves­sel, so no part of the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i> is off-lim­its to you. You may in­spect it in de­tail, and I’ll be de­lighted to act as your guide.”</p>
				<p>“I don’t know how to thank you, sir, but I won’t abuse your good na­ture. I would only ask you about the uses in­tended for these in­stru­ments of phys­i­cal mea­sure—”</p>
				<p>“Pro­fes­sor, these same in­stru­ments are found in my state­room, where I’ll have the plea­sure of ex­plain­ing their func­tions to you. But be­fore­hand, come in­spect the cabin set aside for you. You need to learn how you’ll be lodged aboard the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i>.”</p>
				<p>I fol­lowed Cap­tain Nemo, who, via one of the doors cut into the lounge’s canted cor­ners, led me back down the ship’s gang­ways. He took me to the bow, and there I found not just a cabin but an el­e­gant state­room with a bed, a wash­stand, and var­i­ous other fur­nish­ings.</p>
				<p>I could only thank my host.</p>
				<p>“Your state­room ad­joins mine,” he told me, open­ing a door, “and mine leads into that lounge we’ve just left.”</p>
				<p>I en­tered the cap­tain’s state­room. It had an aus­tere, al­most monas­tic ap­pear­ance. An iron bed­stead, a work­table, some wash­stand fix­tures. Sub­dued light­ing. No lux­u­ries. Just the bare ne­ces­si­ties.</p>
				<p>Cap­tain Nemo showed me to a bench.</p>
				<p>“Kindly be seated,” he told me.</p>
				<p>I sat, and he be­gan speak­ing as fol­lows:</p>
			</section>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
