<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="en-US" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: http://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Chapter 1</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="part-2" epub:type="part">
			<section id="chapter-2-1" epub:type="chapter">
				<h3 epub:type="title">
					<span class="first-child" epub:type="z3998:roman">I</span>
					<span class="epub-type-subtitle" epub:type="subtitle">The Indian Ocean</span>
				</h3>
				<p>Now we be­gin the sec­ond part of this voy­age un­der the seas. The first ended in that mov­ing scene at the coral ceme­tery, which left a pro­found im­pres­sion on my mind. And so Cap­tain Nemo would live out his life en­tirely in the heart of this im­mense sea, and even his grave lay ready in its im­pen­e­tra­ble depths. There the last sleep of the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i>’s oc­cu­pants, friends bound to­gether in death as in life, would be dis­turbed by no mon­ster of the deep! “No man ei­ther!” the cap­tain had added.</p>
				<p>Al­ways that same fierce, im­pla­ca­ble de­fi­ance of hu­man so­ci­ety!</p>
				<p>As for me, I was no longer con­tent with the hy­pothe­ses that sat­is­fied Con­seil. That fine lad per­sisted in see­ing the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i>’s com­man­der as merely one of those un­ap­pre­ci­ated sci­en­tists who re­pay hu­man­ity’s in­dif­fer­ence with con­tempt. For Con­seil, the cap­tain was still a mis­un­der­stood ge­nius who, tired of the world’s de­cep­tions, had been driven to take refuge in this in­ac­ces­si­ble en­vi­ron­ment where he was free to fol­low his in­stincts. But to my mind, this hy­poth­e­sis ex­plained only one side of Cap­tain Nemo.</p>
				<p>In fact, the mys­tery of that last af­ter­noon when we were locked in prison and put to sleep, the cap­tain’s vi­o­lent pre­cau­tion of snatch­ing from my grasp a spy­glass poised to scour the hori­zon, and the fa­tal wound given that man dur­ing some un­ex­plained col­li­sion suf­fered by the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i>, all led me down a plain trail. No! Cap­tain Nemo wasn’t con­tent sim­ply to avoid hu­man­ity! His fear­some sub­mersible served not only his quest for free­dom, but also, per­haps, it was used in lord-knows-what schemes of dread­ful re­venge.</p>
				<p>Right now, noth­ing is clear to me, I still glimpse only glim­mers in the dark, and I must limit my pen, as it were, to tak­ing dic­ta­tion from events.</p>
				<p>But noth­ing binds us to Cap­tain Nemo. He be­lieves that es­cap­ing from the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i> is im­pos­si­ble. We are not even con­strained by our word of honor. No prom­ises fet­ter us. We’re sim­ply cap­tives, pris­on­ers mas­querad­ing un­der the name “guests” for the sake of ev­ery­day cour­tesy. Even so, Ned Land hasn’t given up all hope of re­cov­er­ing his free­dom. He’s sure to take ad­van­tage of the first chance that comes his way. No doubt I will do like­wise. And yet I will feel some re­gret at mak­ing off with the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i>’s se­crets, so gen­er­ously un­veiled for us by Cap­tain Nemo! Be­cause, ul­ti­mately, should we de­test or ad­mire this man? Is he the per­se­cu­tor or the per­se­cuted? And in all hon­esty, be­fore I leave him for­ever, I want to fin­ish this un­der­wa­ter tour of the world, whose first stages have been so mag­nif­i­cent. I want to ob­serve the full se­ries of these won­ders gath­ered un­der the seas of our globe. I want to see what no man has seen yet, even if I must pay for this in­sa­tiable cu­rios­ity with my life! What are my dis­cov­er­ies to date? Noth­ing, rel­a­tively speak­ing—since so far we’ve cov­ered only 6,000 leagues across the Pa­cific!</p>
				<p>Nev­er­the­less, I’m well aware that the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i> is draw­ing near to pop­u­lated shores, and if some chance for sal­va­tion be­comes avail­able to us, it would be sheer cru­elty to sac­ri­fice my com­pan­ions to my pas­sion for the un­known. I must go with them, per­haps even guide them. But will this op­por­tu­nity ever arise? The hu­man be­ing, robbed of his free will, craves such an op­por­tu­nity; but the sci­en­tist, for­ever in­quis­i­tive, dreads it.</p>
				<p>That day, Jan­uary 21, 1868, the chief of­fi­cer went at noon to take the sun’s al­ti­tude. I climbed onto the plat­form, lit a cigar, and watched him at work. It seemed ob­vi­ous to me that this man didn’t un­der­stand French, be­cause I made sev­eral re­marks in a loud voice that were bound to pro­voke him to some in­vol­un­tary show of in­ter­est had he un­der­stood them; but he re­mained mute and emo­tion­less.</p>
				<p>While he took his sights with his sex­tant, one of the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i>’s sailors—that mus­cu­lar man who had gone with us to Cre­spo Is­land dur­ing our first un­der­wa­ter ex­cur­sion—came up to clean the glass panes of the bea­con. I then ex­am­ined the fit­tings of this mech­a­nism, whose power was in­creased a hun­dred­fold by bi­con­vex lenses that were de­signed like those in a light­house and kept its rays pro­duc­tively fo­cused. This elec­tric lamp was so con­structed as to yield its max­i­mum il­lu­mi­nat­ing power. In essence, its light was gen­er­ated in a vac­uum, in­sur­ing both its steadi­ness and in­ten­sity. Such a vac­uum also re­duced wear on the graphite points be­tween which the lu­mi­nous arc ex­panded. This was an im­por­tant sav­ings for Cap­tain Nemo, who couldn’t eas­ily re­new them. But un­der these con­di­tions, wear and tear were al­most nonex­is­tent.</p>
				<p>When the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i> was ready to re­sume its un­der­wa­ter trav­els, I went be­low again to the lounge. The hatches closed once more, and our course was set due west.</p>
				<p>We then plowed the waves of the In­dian Ocean, vast liq­uid plains with an area of 550,000,000 hectares, whose wa­ters are so trans­par­ent it makes you dizzy to lean over their sur­face. There the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i> gen­er­ally drifted at a depth be­tween 100 and 200 me­ters. It be­haved in this way for some days. To any­one with­out my grand pas­sion for the sea, these hours would surely have seemed long and mo­not­o­nous; but my daily strolls on the plat­form where I was re­vived by the life-giv­ing ocean air, the sights in the rich wa­ters be­yond the lounge win­dows, the books to be read in the li­brary, and the com­po­si­tion of my mem­oirs, took up all my time and left me with­out a mo­ment of weari­ness or bore­dom.</p>
				<p>All in all, we en­joyed a highly sat­is­fac­tory state of health. The diet on board agreed with us per­fectly, and for my part, I could eas­ily have gone with­out those changes of pace that Ned Land, in a spirit of protest, kept tax­ing his in­ge­nu­ity to sup­ply us. What’s more, in this con­stant tem­per­a­ture we didn’t even have to worry about catch­ing colds. Be­sides, the ship had a good stock of the madrepore <i epub:type="z3998:taxonomy">Den­drophylia</i>, known in Provence by the name sea fen­nel, and a poul­tice made from the dis­solved flesh of its polyps will fur­nish an ex­cel­lent cough medicine.</p>
				<p>For some days we saw a large num­ber of aquatic birds with webbed feet, known as gulls or sea mews. Some were skill­fully slain, and when cooked in a cer­tain fash­ion, they make a very ac­cept­able plat­ter of wa­ter game. Among the great wind rid­ers—car­ried over long dis­tances from ev­ery shore and rest­ing on the waves from their ex­haust­ing flights—I spot­ted some mag­nif­i­cent al­ba­tross, birds be­long­ing to the <i epub:type="z3998:taxonomy">Longipennes</i> (long-winged) fam­ily, whose dis­cor­dant calls sound like the bray­ing of an ass. The <i epub:type="z3998:taxonomy">Toti­palmes</i> (fully webbed) fam­ily was rep­re­sented by swift frigate birds, nim­bly catch­ing fish at the sur­face, and by nu­mer­ous tropic birds of the genus <i epub:type="z3998:taxonomy">Phaeton</i>, among oth­ers the red-tailed tropic bird, the size of a pi­geon, its white plumage shaded with pink tints that con­trasted with its dark-hued wings.</p>
				<p>The <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i>’s nets hauled up sev­eral types of sea tur­tle from the hawks­bill genus with arch­ing backs whose scales are highly prized. Div­ing eas­ily, these rep­tiles can re­main a good while un­der­wa­ter by clos­ing the fleshy valves lo­cated at the ex­ter­nal open­ings of their nasal pas­sages. When they were cap­tured, some hawks­bills were still asleep in­side their cara­paces, a refuge from other ma­rine an­i­mals. The flesh of these tur­tles was noth­ing mem­o­rable, but their eggs made an ex­cel­lent feast.</p>
				<p>As for fish, they al­ways filled us with won­der­ment when, star­ing through the open pan­els, we could un­veil the se­crets of their aquatic lives. I noted sev­eral species I hadn’t pre­vi­ously been able to ob­serve.</p>
				<p>I’ll men­tion chiefly some trunk­fish unique to the Red Sea, the sea of the East Indies, and that part of the ocean wash­ing the coasts of equinoc­tial Amer­ica. Like tur­tles, ar­madil­los, sea urchins, and crus­taceans, these fish are pro­tected by ar­mor plate that’s nei­ther chalky nor stony but ac­tual bone. Some­times this ar­mor takes the shape of a solid tri­an­gle, some­times that of a solid quad­ran­gle. Among the tri­an­gu­lar type, I no­ticed some half a decime­ter long, with brown tails, yel­low fins, and whole­some, exquisitely tasty flesh; I even rec­om­mend that they be ac­cli­ma­tized to fresh wa­ter, a change, in­ci­den­tally, that a num­ber of salt­wa­ter fish can make with ease. I’ll also men­tion some quad­ran­gu­lar trunk­fish topped by four large pro­tu­ber­ances along the back; trunk­fish sprin­kled with white spots on the un­der­side of the body, which make good house pets like cer­tain birds; box­fish armed with stings formed by ex­ten­sions of their bony crusts, and whose odd grunt­ing has earned them the nick­name “sea pigs”; then some trunk­fish known as drom­e­daries, with tough, leath­ery flesh and big con­i­cal humps.</p>
				<p>From the daily notes kept by Mr. Con­seil, I also re­trieve cer­tain fish from the genus <i epub:type="z3998:taxonomy">Te­tradon</i> unique to these seas: south­ern puffers with red backs and white chests dis­tin­guished by three length­wise rows of fil­a­ments, and jug­fish, seven inches long, decked out in the bright­est col­ors. Then, as spec­i­mens of other gen­era, blow­fish re­sem­bling a dark brown egg, fur­rowed with white bands, and lack­ing tails; globe­fish, gen­uine por­cu­pines of the sea, armed with stings and able to in­flate them­selves un­til they look like a pin cush­ion bristling with nee­dles; sea­horses com­mon to ev­ery ocean; fly­ing drag­on­fish with long snouts and highly dis­tended pec­toral fins shaped like wings, which en­able them, if not to fly, at least to spring into the air; spat­ula-shaped pad­dle­fish whose tails are cov­ered with many scaly rings; snipefish with long jaws, ex­cel­lent an­i­mals twenty-five cen­time­ters long and gleam­ing with the most cheer­ful col­ors; bluish gray drag­onets with wrin­kled heads; myr­i­ads of leap­ing blennies with black stripes and long pec­toral fins, glid­ing over the sur­face of the wa­ter with prodi­gious speed; de­li­cious sail­fish that can hoist their fins in a fa­vor­able cur­rent like so many un­furled sails; splen­did nurs­ery­fish on which na­ture has lav­ished yel­low, azure, sil­ver, and gold; yel­low mack­erel with wings made of fil­a­ments; bull­heads for­ever spat­tered with mud, which make dis­tinct hiss­ing sounds; sea robins whose liv­ers are thought to be poi­sonous; la­dy­fish that can flut­ter their eye­lids; fi­nally, archer­fish with long, tubu­lar snouts, real ocean­go­ing fly­catch­ers, armed with a ri­fle un­fore­seen by ei­ther Rem­ing­ton or Chas­se­pot: it slays in­sects by shoot­ing them with a sim­ple drop of wa­ter.</p>
				<p>From the eighty-ninth fish genus in Lacépède’s sys­tem of clas­si­fi­ca­tion, be­long­ing to his sec­ond sub­class of bony fish (char­ac­ter­ized by gill cov­ers and a bronchial mem­brane), I noted some scor­pi­onfish whose heads are adorned with stings and which have only one dor­sal fin; these an­i­mals are cov­ered with small scales, or have none at all, de­pend­ing on the sub­genus to which they be­long. The sec­ond sub­genus gave us some <i epub:type="z3998:taxonomy">Di­dacty­lus</i> spec­i­mens three to four decime­ters long, streaked with yel­low, their heads hav­ing a phan­tas­magoric ap­pear­ance. As for the first sub­genus, it fur­nished sev­eral spec­i­mens of that bizarre fish aptly nick­named “toad­fish,” whose big head is some­times gouged with deep cav­i­ties, some­times swollen with pro­tu­ber­ances; bristling with stings and strewn with nod­ules, it sports hideously ir­reg­u­lar horns; its body and tail are adorned with cal­losi­ties; its stings can in­flict dan­ger­ous in­juries; it’s re­pul­sive and hor­ri­ble.</p>
				<p>From Jan­uary 21 to the 23rd, the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i> trav­eled at the rate of 250 leagues in twenty-four hours, hence 540 miles at twenty-two miles per hour. If, dur­ing our trip, we were able to iden­tify these dif­fer­ent va­ri­eties of fish, it’s be­cause they were at­tracted by our elec­tric light and tried to fol­low along­side; but most of them were out­dis­tanced by our speed and soon fell be­hind; tem­po­rar­ily, how­ever, a few man­aged to keep pace in the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i>’s wa­ters.</p>
				<p>On the morn­ing of the 24th, in lat­i­tude 12° 5′ south and lon­gi­tude 94° 33′, we raised Keel­ing Is­land, a madreporic up­heav­ing planted with mag­nif­i­cent co­conut trees, which had been vis­ited by Mr. Dar­win and Cap­tain Fitzroy. The <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i> cruised along a short dis­tance off the shore of this desert is­land. Our drag­nets brought up many spec­i­mens of polyps and echin­o­derms plus some un­usual shells from the branch <i epub:type="z3998:taxonomy">Mol­lusca</i>. Cap­tain Nemo’s trea­sures were en­hanced by some valu­able ex­hibits from the <i epub:type="z3998:taxonomy">del­phin­ula</i> snail species, to which I joined some pointed star coral, a sort of par­a­sitic poly­pary that of­ten at­taches it­self to seashells.</p>
				<p>Soon Keel­ing Is­land dis­ap­peared be­low the hori­zon, and our course was set to the north­west, to­ward the tip of the In­dian penin­sula.</p>
				<p>“Civ­i­liza­tion!” Ned Land told me that day. “Much bet­ter than those Pa­puan Is­lands where we ran into more sav­ages than veni­son! On this In­dian shore, pro­fes­sor, there are roads and rail­ways, English, French, and Hindu vil­lages. We wouldn’t go five miles with­out bump­ing into a fel­low coun­try­man. Come on now, isn’t it time for our sud­den de­par­ture from Cap­tain Nemo?”</p>
				<p>“No, no, Ned,” I replied in a very firm tone. “Let’s ride it out, as you sea­far­ing fel­lows say. The <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i> is ap­proach­ing pop­u­lated ar­eas. It’s go­ing back to­ward Europe, let it take us there. After we ar­rive in home wa­ters, we can do as we see fit. Be­sides, I don’t imag­ine Cap­tain Nemo will let us go hunt­ing on the coasts of Mal­abar or Coro­man­del as he did in the forests of New Guinea.”</p>
				<p>“Well, sir, can’t we man­age with­out his per­mis­sion?”</p>
				<p>I didn’t an­swer the Cana­dian. I wanted no ar­gu­ments. Deep down, I was de­ter­mined to fully ex­ploit the good for­tune that had put me on board the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i>.</p>
				<p>After leav­ing Keel­ing Is­land, our pace got gen­er­ally slower. It also got more un­pre­dictable, of­ten tak­ing us to great depths. Sev­eral times we used our slant­ing fins, which in­ter­nal levers could set at an oblique an­gle to our wa­ter­line. Thus we went as deep as two or three kilo­me­ters down but with­out ever ver­i­fy­ing the low­est depths of this sea near In­dia, which sound­ings of 13,000 me­ters have been un­able to reach. As for the tem­per­a­ture in these lower strata, the ther­mome­ter al­ways and in­vari­ably in­di­cated 4° centi­grade. I merely ob­served that in the up­per lay­ers, the wa­ter was al­ways colder over shal­lows than in the open sea.</p>
				<p>On Jan­uary 25, the ocean be­ing com­pletely de­serted, the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i> spent the day on the sur­face, churn­ing the waves with its pow­er­ful pro­pel­ler and mak­ing them spurt to great heights. Un­der these con­di­tions, who wouldn’t have mis­taken it for a gi­gan­tic cetacean? I spent three-quar­ters of the day on the plat­form. I stared at the sea. Noth­ing on the hori­zon, ex­cept near four o’clock in the af­ter­noon a long steamer to the west, run­ning on our op­po­site tack. Its mast­ing was vis­i­ble for an in­stant, but it couldn’t have seen the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i> be­cause we were ly­ing too low in the wa­ter. I imag­ine that steam­boat be­longed to the Penin­su­lar &amp; Ori­en­tal line, which pro­vides ser­vice from the is­land of Cey­lon to Sid­ney, also call­ing at King Ge­orge Sound and Mel­bourne.</p>
				<p>At five o’clock in the af­ter­noon, just be­fore that brief twi­light that links day with night in trop­i­cal zones, Con­seil and I mar­veled at an un­usual sight.</p>
				<p>It was a de­light­ful an­i­mal whose dis­cov­ery, ac­cord­ing to the an­cients, is a sign of good luck. Aris­to­tle, Athenaeus, Pliny, and Op­pian stud­ied its habits and lav­ished on its be­half all the sci­en­tific po­etry of Greece and Italy. They called it <i lang="el" xml:lang="el">nau­tilus</i> and <i lang="la" xml:lang="la">pom­pil­ius</i>. But mod­ern sci­ence has not en­dorsed these des­ig­na­tions, and this mol­lusk is now known by the name <i>arg­onaut</i>.</p>
				<p>Any­one con­sult­ing Con­seil would soon learn from the gal­lant lad that the branch <i epub:type="z3998:taxonomy">Mol­lusca</i> is di­vided into five classes; that the first class fea­tures the <i epub:type="z3998:taxonomy">Cephalopoda</i> (whose mem­bers are some­times naked, some­times cov­ered with a shell), which con­sists of two fam­i­lies, the <i epub:type="z3998:taxonomy">Di­branchi­ata</i> and the <i epub:type="z3998:taxonomy">Te­tra­branchi­ata</i>, which are dis­tin­guished by their num­ber of gills; that the fam­ily <i epub:type="z3998:taxonomy">Di­branchi­ata</i> in­cludes three gen­era, the arg­onaut, the squid, and the cut­tle­fish, and that the fam­ily <i epub:type="z3998:taxonomy">Te­tra­branchi­ata</i> con­tains only one genus, the <i epub:type="z3998:taxonomy">Nau­tilus</i>. After this cat­a­log, if some re­cal­ci­trant lis­tener con­fuses the arg­onaut, which is ac­etab­u­lif­er­ous (in other words, a bearer of suc­tion tubes), with the nau­tilus, which is ten­ta­c­ulif­er­ous (a bearer of ten­ta­cles), it will be sim­ply un­for­giv­able.</p>
				<p>Now, it was a school of arg­onauts then voy­ag­ing on the sur­face of the ocean. We could count sev­eral hun­dred of them. They be­longed to that species of arg­onaut cov­ered with pro­tu­ber­ances and ex­clu­sive to the seas near In­dia.</p>
				<p>Th­ese grace­ful mol­lusks were swim­ming back­ward by means of their lo­co­mo­tive tubes, suck­ing wa­ter into these tubes and then ex­pelling it. Six of their eight ten­ta­cles were long, thin, and floated on the wa­ter, while the other two were rounded into palms and spread to the wind like light sails. I could see per­fectly their un­du­lat­ing, spi­ral-shaped shells, which Cu­vier aptly com­pared to an el­e­gant cock­le­boat. It’s an ac­tual boat in­deed. It trans­ports the an­i­mal that se­cretes it with­out the an­i­mal stick­ing to it.</p>
				<p>“The arg­onaut is free to leave its shell,” I told Con­seil, “but it never does.”</p>
				<p>“Not un­like Cap­tain Nemo,” Con­seil replied sagely. “Which is why he should have chris­tened his ship the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Arg­onaut</i>.”</p>
				<p>For about an hour the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i> cruised in the midst of this school of mol­lusks. Then, lord knows why, they were gripped with a sud­den fear. As if at a sig­nal, ev­ery sail was abruptly low­ered; arms folded, bod­ies con­tracted, shells turned over by chang­ing their cen­ter of grav­ity, and the whole flotilla dis­ap­peared un­der the waves. It was in­stan­ta­neous, and no squadron of ships ever ma­neu­vered with greater to­geth­er­ness.</p>
				<p>Just then night fell sud­denly, and the waves barely surged in the breeze, spread­ing placidly around the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i>’s side plates.</p>
				<p>The next day, Jan­uary 26, we cut the equa­tor on the 82nd merid­ian and we reen­tered the north­ern hemi­sphere.</p>
				<p>Dur­ing that day a fear­some school of sharks pro­vided us with an es­cort. Dread­ful an­i­mals that teem in these seas and make them ex­tremely dan­ger­ous. There were Port Jack­son sharks with a brown back, a whitish belly, and eleven rows of teeth, big­eye sharks with necks marked by a large black spot en­cir­cled in white and re­sem­bling an eye, and Is­abella sharks whose rounded snouts were strewn with dark speck­les. Often these pow­er­ful an­i­mals rushed at the lounge win­dow with a vi­o­lence less than com­fort­ing. By this point Ned Land had lost all self-con­trol. He wanted to rise to the sur­face of the waves and har­poon the mon­sters, es­pe­cially cer­tain smooth-hound sharks whose mouths were paved with teeth ar­ranged like a mo­saic, and some big five-me­ter tiger sharks that in­sisted on per­son­ally pro­vok­ing him. But the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i> soon picked up speed and eas­ily left astern the fastest of these man-eaters.</p>
				<p>On Jan­uary 27, at the en­trance to the huge Bay of Ben­gal, we re­peat­edly en­coun­tered a grue­some sight: hu­man corpses float­ing on the sur­face of the waves! Car­ried by the Ganges to the high seas, these were de­ceased In­dian vil­lagers who hadn’t been fully de­voured by vul­tures, the only mor­ti­cians in these parts. But there was no short­age of sharks to as­sist them with their un­der­tak­ing chores.</p>
				<p>Near seven o’clock in the evening, the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i> lay half sub­merged, nav­i­gat­ing in the midst of milky white waves. As far as the eye could see, the ocean seemed lac­t­i­fied. Was it an ef­fect of the moon’s rays? No, be­cause the new moon was barely two days old and was still lost be­low the hori­zon in the sun’s rays. The en­tire sky, al­though lit up by stel­lar ra­di­a­tion, seemed pitch-black in com­par­i­son with the white­ness of these wa­ters.</p>
				<p>Con­seil couldn’t be­lieve his eyes, and he ques­tioned me about the causes of this odd phe­nom­e­non. Luck­ily I was in a po­si­tion to an­swer him.</p>
				<p>“That’s called a milk sea,” I told him, “a vast ex­panse of white waves of­ten seen along the coasts of Am­boina and in these wa­ter­ways.”</p>
				<p>“But,” Con­seil asked, “could mas­ter tell me the cause of this ef­fect, be­cause I pre­sume this wa­ter hasn’t re­ally changed into milk!”</p>
				<p>“No, my boy, and this white­ness that amazes you is merely due to the pres­ence of myr­i­ads of tiny crea­tures called in­fu­so­ria, a sort of diminu­tive glow­worm that’s col­or­less and gelati­nous in ap­pear­ance, as thick as a strand of hair, and no longer than one-fifth of a mil­lime­ter. Some of these tiny crea­tures stick to­gether over an area of sev­eral leagues.”</p>
				<p>“Sev­eral leagues!” Con­seil ex­claimed.</p>
				<p>“Yes, my boy, and don’t even try to com­pute the num­ber of these in­fu­so­ria. You won’t pull it off, be­cause if I’m not mis­taken, cer­tain nav­i­ga­tors have cruised through milk seas for more than forty miles.”</p>
				<p>I’m not sure that Con­seil heeded my rec­om­men­da­tion, be­cause he seemed to be deep in thought, no doubt try­ing to cal­cu­late how many one-fifths of a mil­lime­ter are found in forty square miles. As for me, I con­tin­ued to ob­serve this phe­nom­e­non. For sev­eral hours the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i>’s spur sliced through these whitish waves, and I watched it glide noise­lessly over this soapy wa­ter, as if it were cruis­ing through those foam­ing ed­dies that a bay’s cur­rents and coun­ter­cur­rents some­times leave be­tween each other.</p>
				<p>Near mid­night the sea sud­denly re­sumed its usual hue, but be­hind us all the way to the hori­zon, the skies kept mir­ror­ing the white­ness of those waves and for a good while seemed im­bued with the hazy glow of an au­rora bo­re­alis.</p>
			</section>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
