<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="en-US" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: http://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Chapter 6</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="part-2" epub:type="part">
			<section id="chapter-2-6" epub:type="chapter">
				<h3 epub:type="title">
					<span epub:type="z3998:roman">VI</span>
					<span class="epub-type-subtitle" epub:type="subtitle">The Greek Islands</span>
				</h3>
				<p>At sun­rise the next morn­ing, Fe­bru­ary 12, the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i> rose to the sur­face of the waves.</p>
				<p>I rushed onto the plat­form. The hazy sil­hou­ette of Pelu­sium was out­lined three miles to the south. A tor­rent had car­ried us from one sea to the other. But al­though that tun­nel was easy to de­scend, go­ing back up must have been im­pos­si­ble.</p>
				<p>Near seven o’clock Ned and Con­seil joined me. Those two in­sep­a­ra­ble com­pan­ions had slept serenely, ut­terly un­aware of the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i>’s feat.</p>
				<p>“Well, Mr. Nat­u­ral­ist,” the Cana­dian asked in a gen­tly mock­ing tone, “and how about that Mediter­ranean?”</p>
				<p>“We’re float­ing on its sur­face, Ned my friend.”</p>
				<p>“What!” Con­seil put in. “Last night … ?”</p>
				<p>“Yes, last night, in a mat­ter of min­utes, we cleared that in­su­per­a­ble isth­mus.”</p>
				<p>“I don’t be­lieve a word of it,” the Cana­dian replied.</p>
				<p>“And you’re in the wrong, Mr. Land,” I went on. “That flat coast­line curv­ing south­ward is the coast of Egypt.”</p>
				<p>“Tell it to the marines, sir,” an­swered the stub­born Cana­dian.</p>
				<p>“But if mas­ter says so,” Con­seil told him, “then so be it.”</p>
				<p>“What’s more, Ned,” I said, “Cap­tain Nemo him­self did the hon­ors in his tun­nel, and I stood be­side him in the pi­lot­house while he steered the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i> through that nar­row pas­sage­way.”</p>
				<p>“You hear, Ned?” Con­seil said.</p>
				<p>“And you, Ned, who have such good eyes,” I added, “you can spot the jet­ties of Port Said stretch­ing out to sea.”</p>
				<p>The Cana­dian looked care­fully.</p>
				<p>“Cor­rect,” he said. “You’re right, pro­fes­sor, and your cap­tain’s a su­per­man. We’re in the Mediter­ranean. Fine. So now let’s have a chat about our lit­tle do­ings, if you please, but in such a way that no­body over­hears.”</p>
				<p>I could eas­ily see what the Cana­dian was driv­ing at. In any event, I thought it best to let him have his chat, and we all three went to sit next to the bea­con, where we were less ex­posed to the damp spray from the bil­lows.</p>
				<p>“Now, Ned, we’re all ears,” I said. “What have you to tell us?”</p>
				<p>“What I’ve got to tell you is very sim­ple,” the Cana­dian replied. “We’re in Europe, and be­fore Cap­tain Nemo’s whims take us deep into the po­lar seas or back to Ocea­nia, I say we should leave this <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i>.”</p>
				<p>I con­fess that such dis­cus­sions with the Cana­dian al­ways baf­fled me. I didn’t want to re­strict my com­pan­ions’ free­dom in any way, and yet I had no de­sire to leave Cap­tain Nemo. Thanks to him and his sub­mersible, I was fin­ish­ing my un­der­sea re­search by the day, and I was rewrit­ing my book on the great ocean depths in the midst of its very el­e­ment. Would I ever again have such an op­por­tu­nity to ob­serve the ocean’s won­ders? Ab­so­lutely not! So I couldn’t en­ter­tain this idea of leav­ing the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i> be­fore com­plet­ing our course of in­quiry.</p>
				<p>“Ned my friend,” I said, “an­swer me hon­estly. Are you bored with this ship? Are you sorry that fate has cast you into Cap­tain Nemo’s hands?”</p>
				<p>The Cana­dian paused for a short while be­fore re­ply­ing. Then, cross­ing his arms:</p>
				<p>“Hon­estly,” he said, “I’m not sorry about this voy­age un­der the seas. I’ll be glad to have done it, but in or­der to have done it, it has to fin­ish. That’s my feel­ing.”</p>
				<p>“It will fin­ish, Ned.”</p>
				<p>“Where and when?”</p>
				<p>“Where? I don’t know. When? I can’t say. Or, rather, I sup­pose it will be over when these seas have noth­ing more to teach us. Every­thing that be­gins in this world must in­evitably come to an end.”</p>
				<p>“I think as mas­ter does,” Con­seil replied, “and it’s ex­tremely pos­si­ble that af­ter cross­ing ev­ery sea on the globe, Cap­tain Nemo will bid the three of us a fond farewell.”</p>
				<p>“Bid us a fond farewell?” the Cana­dian ex­claimed. “You mean beat us to a fare-thee-well!”</p>
				<p>“Let’s not ex­ag­ger­ate, Mr. Land,” I went on. “We have noth­ing to fear from the cap­tain, but nei­ther do I share Con­seil’s views. We’re privy to the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i>’s se­crets, and I don’t ex­pect that its com­man­der, just to set us free, will meekly stand by while we spread those se­crets all over the world.”</p>
				<p>“But in that case what do you ex­pect?” the Cana­dian asked.</p>
				<p>“That we’ll en­counter ad­van­ta­geous con­di­tions for es­cap­ing just as read­ily in six months as now.”</p>
				<p>“Great Scott!” Ned Land put in. “And where, if you please, will we be in six months, Mr. Nat­u­ral­ist?”</p>
				<p>“Per­haps here, per­haps in China. You know how quickly the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i> moves. It crosses oceans like swal­lows cross the air or ex­press trains con­ti­nents. It doesn’t fear heav­ily trav­eled seas. Who can say it won’t hug the coasts of France, Eng­land, or Amer­ica, where an es­cape at­tempt could be car­ried out just as ef­fec­tively as here.”</p>
				<p>“Pro­fes­sor Aron­nax,” the Cana­dian replied, “your ar­gu­ments are rot­ten to the core. You talk way off in the fu­ture: ‘We’ll be here, we’ll be there!’ Me, I’m talk­ing about right now: we are here, and we must take ad­van­tage of it!”</p>
				<p>I was hard pressed by Ned Land’s com­mon sense, and I felt my­self los­ing ground. I no longer knew what ar­gu­ments to put for­ward on my be­half.</p>
				<p>“Sir,” Ned went on, “let’s sup­pose that by some im­pos­si­bil­ity, Cap­tain Nemo of­fered your free­dom to you this very day. Would you ac­cept?”</p>
				<p>“I don’t know,” I replied.</p>
				<p>“And sup­pose he adds that this of­fer he’s mak­ing you to­day won’t ever be re­peated, then would you ac­cept?”</p>
				<p>I did not re­ply.</p>
				<p>“And what thinks our friend Con­seil?” Ned Land asked.</p>
				<p>“Your friend Con­seil,” the fine lad replied serenely, “has noth­ing to say for him­self. He’s a com­pletely dis­in­ter­ested party on this ques­tion. Like his mas­ter, like his com­rade Ned, he’s a bach­e­lor. Nei­ther wife, par­ents, nor chil­dren are wait­ing for him back home. He’s in mas­ter’s em­ploy, he thinks like mas­ter, he speaks like mas­ter, and much to his re­gret, he can’t be counted on to form a ma­jor­ity. Only two per­sons face each other here: mas­ter on one side, Ned Land on the other. That said, your friend Con­seil is lis­ten­ing, and he’s ready to keep score.”</p>
				<p>I couldn’t help smil­ing as Con­seil wiped him­self out of ex­is­tence. Deep down, the Cana­dian must have been over­joyed at not hav­ing to con­tend with him.</p>
				<p>“Then, sir,” Ned Land said, “since Con­seil is no more, we’ll have this dis­cus­sion be­tween just the two of us. I’ve talked, you’ve lis­tened. What’s your re­ply?”</p>
				<p>It was ob­vi­ous that the mat­ter had to be set­tled, and eva­sions were dis­taste­ful to me.</p>
				<p>“Ned my friend,” I said, “here’s my re­ply. You have right on your side and my ar­gu­ments can’t stand up to yours. It will never do to count on Cap­tain Nemo’s benev­o­lence. The most or­di­nary good sense would for­bid him to set us free. On the other hand, good sense de­crees that we take ad­van­tage of our first op­por­tu­nity to leave the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i>.”</p>
				<p>“Fine, Pro­fes­sor Aron­nax, that’s wisely said.”</p>
				<p>“But one pro­viso,” I said, “just one. The op­por­tu­nity must be the real thing. Our first at­tempt to es­cape must suc­ceed, be­cause if it mis­fires, we won’t get a sec­ond chance, and Cap­tain Nemo will never for­give us.”</p>
				<p>“That’s also well put,” the Cana­dian replied. “But your pro­viso ap­plies to any es­cape at­tempt, whether it hap­pens in two years or two days. So this is still the ques­tion: if a promis­ing op­por­tu­nity comes up, we have to grab it.”</p>
				<p>“Agreed. And now, Ned, will you tell me what you mean by a promis­ing op­por­tu­nity?”</p>
				<p>“One that leads the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i> on a cloudy night within a short dis­tance of some Euro­pean coast.”</p>
				<p>“And you’ll try to get away by swim­ming?”</p>
				<p>“Yes, if we’re close enough to shore and the ship’s afloat on the sur­face. No, if we’re well out and the ship’s nav­i­gat­ing un­der the wa­ters.”</p>
				<p>“And in that event?”</p>
				<p>“In that event I’ll try to get hold of the skiff. I know how to han­dle it. We’ll stick our­selves in­side, undo the bolts, and rise to the sur­face, with­out the helms­man in the bow see­ing a thing.”</p>
				<p>“Fine, Ned. Stay on the look­out for such an op­por­tu­nity, but don’t for­get, one slipup will fin­ish us.”</p>
				<p>“I won’t for­get, sir.”</p>
				<p>“And now, Ned, would you like to know my over­all think­ing on your plan?”</p>
				<p>“Gladly, Pro­fes­sor Aron­nax.”</p>
				<p>“Well then, I think—and I don’t mean ‘I hope’—that your promis­ing op­por­tu­nity won’t ever arise.”</p>
				<p>“Why not?”</p>
				<p>“Be­cause Cap­tain Nemo rec­og­nizes that we haven’t given up all hope of re­cov­er­ing our free­dom, and he’ll keep on his guard, above all in seas within sight of the coasts of Europe.”</p>
				<p>“I’m of mas­ter’s opin­ion,” Con­seil said.</p>
				<p>“We’ll soon see,” Ned Land replied, shak­ing his head with a de­ter­mined ex­pres­sion.</p>
				<p>“And now, Ned Land,” I added, “let’s leave it at that. Not an­other word on any of this. The day you’re ready, alert us and we’re with you. I turn it all over to you.”</p>
				<p>That’s how we ended this con­ver­sa­tion, which later was to have such se­ri­ous con­se­quences. At first, I must say, events seemed to con­firm my fore­casts, much to the Cana­dian’s de­spair. Did Cap­tain Nemo view us with dis­trust in these heav­ily trav­eled seas, or did he sim­ply want to hide from the sight of those ships of ev­ery na­tion that plowed the Mediter­ranean? I have no idea, but usu­ally he stayed in mid­wa­ter and well out from any coast. Either the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i> sur­faced only enough to let its pi­lot­house emerge, or it slipped away to the lower depths, al­though, be­tween the Greek Is­lands and Asia Mi­nor, we didn’t find bot­tom even at 2,000 me­ters down.</p>
				<p>Ac­cord­ingly, I be­came aware of the isle of Karpathos, one of the Spo­rades Is­lands, only when Cap­tain Nemo placed his fin­ger over a spot on the world map and quoted me this verse from Vir­gil:</p>
				<blockquote lang="la" xml:lang="la">
					<p>Est in Carpathio Nep­tuni gur­gite vates</p>
					<p>Caeruleus Pro­teus …<a class="epub-type-noteref" href="../text/endnotes.xhtml#note-13" id="note-13" epub:type="noteref">13</a></p>
				</blockquote>
				<p>It was in­deed that by­gone abode of Pro­teus, the old shep­herd of King Nep­tune’s flocks: an is­land lo­cated be­tween Rhodes and Crete, which Greeks now call Karpathos, Ital­ians Scarpanto. Through the lounge win­dow I could see only its gran­ite bedrock.</p>
				<p>The next day, Fe­bru­ary 14, I de­cided to spend a few hours study­ing the fish of this is­land group; but for what­ever rea­son, the pan­els re­mained her­met­i­cally sealed. After de­ter­min­ing the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i>’s head­ing, I noted that it was pro­ceed­ing to­ward the an­cient is­land of Crete, also called Can­dia. At the time I had shipped aboard the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Abra­ham Lin­coln</i>, this whole is­land was in re­bel­lion against its tyran­ni­cal rulers, the Ot­toman Em­pire of Turkey. But since then I had ab­so­lutely no idea what hap­pened to this rev­o­lu­tion, and Cap­tain Nemo, de­prived of all con­tact with the shore, was hardly the man to keep me in­formed.</p>
				<p>So I didn’t al­lude to this event when, that evening, I chanced to be alone with the cap­tain in the lounge. Be­sides, he seemed silent and pre­oc­cu­pied. Then, con­trary to cus­tom, he or­dered that both pan­els in the lounge be opened, and go­ing from the one to the other, he care­fully ob­served the wa­tery mass. For what pur­pose? I hadn’t a guess, and for my part, I spent my time study­ing the fish that passed be­fore my eyes.</p>
				<p>Among oth­ers I noted that sand goby men­tioned by Aris­to­tle and com­monly known by the name sea loach, which is en­coun­tered ex­clu­sively in the salty wa­ters next to the Nile Delta. Near them some semiphos­pho­res­cent red porgy rolled by, a va­ri­ety of gilt­head that the Egyp­tians ranked among their sa­cred an­i­mals, laud­ing them in re­li­gious cer­e­monies when their ar­rival in the river’s wa­ters an­nounced the fer­tile flood sea­son. I also no­ticed some wrasse known as the tapiro, three decime­ters long, bony fish with trans­par­ent scales whose bluish gray color is mixed with red spots; they’re en­thu­si­as­tic eaters of ma­rine veg­eta­bles, which gives them an ex­quis­ite fla­vor; hence these tapiro were much in de­mand by the epi­cures of an­cient Rome, and their en­trails were dressed with brains of pea­cock, tongue of flamingo, and testes of moray to make that di­vine plat­ter that so en­rap­tured the Ro­man em­peror Vitel­lius.</p>
				<p>Another res­i­dent of these seas caught my at­ten­tion and re­vived all my mem­o­ries of an­tiq­uity. This was the remora, which trav­els at­tached to the bel­lies of sharks; as the an­cients tell it, when these lit­tle fish cling to the un­der­sides of a ship, they can bring it to a halt, and by so im­ped­ing Mark Antony’s ves­sel dur­ing the Bat­tle of Ac­tium, one of them fa­cil­i­tated the vic­tory of Au­gus­tus Cae­sar. From such slen­der threads hang the des­tinies of na­tions! I also ob­served some won­der­ful snap­pers be­long­ing to the or­der <i epub:type="z3998:taxonomy">Lu­tian­ida</i>, sa­cred fish for the Greeks, who claimed they could drive off sea mon­sters from the wa­ters they fre­quent; their Greek name <i lang="el" xml:lang="el">an­thias</i> means “flower,” and they live up to it in the play of their col­ors and in those fleet­ing re­flec­tions that turn their dor­sal fins into wa­tered silk; their hues are con­fined to a gamut of reds, from the pal­lor of pink to the glow of ruby. I couldn’t take my eyes off these ma­rine won­ders, when I was sud­denly jolted by an un­ex­pected ap­pari­tion.</p>
				<p>In the midst of the wa­ters, a man ap­peared, a diver car­ry­ing a lit­tle leather bag at his belt. It was no corpse lost in the waves. It was a liv­ing man, swim­ming vig­or­ously, some­times dis­ap­pear­ing to breathe at the sur­face, then in­stantly div­ing again.</p>
				<p>I turned to Cap­tain Nemo, and in an ag­i­tated voice:</p>
				<p>“A man! A cast­away!” I ex­claimed. “We must res­cue him at all cost!”</p>
				<p>The cap­tain didn’t re­ply but went to lean against the win­dow.</p>
				<p>The man drew near, and glu­ing his face to the panel, he stared at us.</p>
				<p>To my deep as­ton­ish­ment, Cap­tain Nemo gave him a sig­nal. The diver an­swered with his hand, im­me­di­ately swam up to the sur­face of the sea, and didn’t reap­pear.</p>
				<p>“Don’t be alarmed,” the cap­tain told me. “That’s Ni­co­las from Cape Mat­a­pan, nick­named ‘Il Pesce.’<a class="epub-type-noteref" href="../text/endnotes.xhtml#note-14" id="note-14" epub:type="noteref">14</a> He’s well known through­out the Cy­clades Is­lands. A bold diver! Water is his true el­e­ment, and he lives in the sea more than on shore, go­ing con­stantly from one is­land to an­other, even to Crete.”</p>
				<p>“You know him, cap­tain?”</p>
				<p>“Why not, Pro­fes­sor Aron­nax?”</p>
				<p>This said, Cap­tain Nemo went to a cab­i­net stand­ing near the lounge’s left panel. Next to this cab­i­net I saw a chest bound with hoops of iron, its lid bear­ing a cop­per plaque that dis­played the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i>’s mono­gram with its motto <i lang="la" xml:lang="la">Mo­bilis in Mo­bili</i>.</p>
				<p>Just then, ig­nor­ing my pres­ence, the cap­tain opened this cab­i­net, a sort of safe that con­tained a large num­ber of in­gots.</p>
				<p>They were gold in­gots. And they rep­re­sented an enor­mous sum of money. Where had this pre­cious metal come from? How had the cap­tain amassed this gold, and what was he about to do with it?</p>
				<p>I didn’t pro­nounce a word. I gaped. Cap­tain Nemo took out the in­gots one by one and ar­ranged them me­thod­i­cally in­side the chest, fill­ing it to the top. At which point I es­ti­mate that it held more than 1,000 kilo­grams of gold, in other words, close to 5,000,000 francs.</p>
				<p>After se­curely fas­ten­ing the chest, Cap­tain Nemo wrote an ad­dress on its lid in char­ac­ters that must have been mod­ern Greek.</p>
				<p>This done, the cap­tain pressed a but­ton whose wiring was in com­mu­ni­ca­tion with the crew’s quar­ters. Four men ap­peared and, not with­out dif­fi­culty, pushed the chest out of the lounge. Then I heard them hoist it up the iron com­pan­ion­way by means of pul­leys.</p>
				<p>Just then Cap­tain Nemo turned to me:</p>
				<p>“You were say­ing, pro­fes­sor?” he asked me.</p>
				<p>“I wasn’t say­ing a thing, cap­tain.”</p>
				<p>“Then, sir, with your per­mis­sion, I’ll bid you good evening.”</p>
				<p>And with that, Cap­tain Nemo left the lounge.</p>
				<p>I reen­tered my state­room, very puz­zled, as you can imag­ine. I tried in vain to fall asleep. I kept search­ing for a re­la­tion­ship be­tween the ap­pear­ance of the diver and that chest filled with gold. Soon, from cer­tain rolling and pitch­ing move­ments, I sensed that the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i> had left the lower strata and was back on the sur­face of the wa­ter.</p>
				<p>Then I heard the sound of foot­steps on the plat­form. I re­al­ized that the skiff was be­ing de­tached and launched to sea. For an in­stant it bumped the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i>’s side, then all sounds ceased.</p>
				<p>Two hours later, the same noises, the same com­ings and go­ings, were re­peated. Hoisted on board, the long­boat was read­justed into its socket, and the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i> plunged back be­neath the waves.</p>
				<p>So those mil­lions had been de­liv­ered to their ad­dress. At what spot on the con­ti­nent? Who was the re­cip­i­ent of Cap­tain Nemo’s gold?</p>
				<p>The next day I re­lated the night’s events to Con­seil and the Cana­dian, events that had aroused my cu­rios­ity to a fever pitch. My com­pan­ions were as star­tled as I was.</p>
				<p>“But where does he get those mil­lions?” Ned Land asked.</p>
				<p>To this no re­ply was pos­si­ble. After break­fast I made my way to the lounge and went about my work. I wrote up my notes un­til five o’clock in the af­ter­noon. Just then—was it due to some per­sonal in­dis­po­si­tion?—I felt ex­tremely hot and had to take off my jacket made of fan mus­sel fab­ric. A per­plex­ing cir­cum­stance be­cause we weren’t in the low lat­i­tudes, and be­sides, once the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i> was sub­merged, it shouldn’t be sub­ject to any rise in tem­per­a­ture. I looked at the pres­sure gauge. It marked a depth of sixty feet, a depth be­yond the reach of at­mo­spheric heat.</p>
				<p>I kept on work­ing, but the tem­per­a­ture rose to the point of be­com­ing un­bear­able.</p>
				<p>“Could there be a fire on board?” I won­dered.</p>
				<p>I was about to leave the lounge when Cap­tain Nemo en­tered. He ap­proached the ther­mome­ter, con­sulted it, and turned to me:</p>
				<p>“42° centi­grade,” he said.</p>
				<p>“I’ve de­tected as much, cap­tain,” I replied, “and if it gets even slightly hot­ter, we won’t be able to stand it.”</p>
				<p>“Oh, pro­fes­sor, it won’t get any hot­ter un­less we want it to!”</p>
				<p>“You mean you can con­trol this heat?”</p>
				<p>“No, but I can back away from the fire­place pro­duc­ing it.”</p>
				<p>“So it’s out­side?”</p>
				<p>“Surely. We’re cruis­ing in a cur­rent of boil­ing wa­ter.”</p>
				<p>“It can’t be!” I ex­claimed.</p>
				<p>“Look.”</p>
				<p>The pan­els had opened, and I could see a com­pletely white sea around the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i>. Steam­ing sul­furous fumes un­coiled in the midst of waves bub­bling like wa­ter in a boiler. I leaned my hand against one of the win­dows, but the heat was so great, I had to snatch it back.</p>
				<p>“Where are we?” I asked.</p>
				<p>“Near the is­land of San­torini, pro­fes­sor,” the cap­tain an­swered me, “and right in the chan­nel that sep­a­rates the vol­canic islets of Nea Ka­meni and Palea Ka­meni. I wanted to of­fer you the un­usual sight of an un­der­wa­ter erup­tion.”</p>
				<p>“I thought,” I said, “that the for­ma­tion of such new is­lands had come to an end.”</p>
				<p>“Noth­ing ever comes to an end in these vol­canic wa­ter­ways,” Cap­tain Nemo replied, “and thanks to its un­der­ground fires, our globe is con­tin­u­ously un­der con­struc­tion in these re­gions. Ac­cord­ing to the Latin his­to­ri­ans Cas­siodorus and Pliny, by the year 19 of the Chris­tian era, a new is­land, the di­vine Thera, had al­ready ap­peared in the very place these islets have more re­cently formed. Then Thera sank un­der the waves, only to rise and sink once more in the year 69 <span class="era">AD</span>. From that day to this, such plu­tonic con­struc­tion work has been in abeyance. But on Fe­bru­ary 3, 1866, a new islet named Ge­orge Is­land emerged in the midst of sul­furous steam near Nea Ka­meni and was fused to it on the 6th of the same month. Seven days later, on Fe­bru­ary 13, the islet of Aphroessa ap­peared, leav­ing a ten-me­ter chan­nel be­tween it­self and Nea Ka­meni. I was in these seas when that phe­nom­e­non oc­curred and I was able to ob­serve its ev­ery phase. The islet of Aphroessa was cir­cu­lar in shape, mea­sur­ing 300 feet in di­am­e­ter and thirty feet in height. It was made of black, glassy lava mixed with bits of feldspar. Fi­nally, on March 10, a smaller islet called Reka ap­peared next to Nea Ka­meni, and since then, these three islets have fused to form one sin­gle, self­same is­land.”</p>
				<p>“What about this chan­nel we’re in right now?” I asked.</p>
				<p>“Here it is,” Cap­tain Nemo replied, show­ing me a chart of the Greek Is­lands. “You ob­serve that I’ve en­tered the new islets in their place.”</p>
				<p>“But will this chan­nel fill up one day?”</p>
				<p>“Very likely, Pro­fes­sor Aron­nax, be­cause since 1866 eight lit­tle lava islets have surged up in front of the port of St. Ni­co­las on Palea Ka­meni. So it’s ob­vi­ous that Nea and Palea will join in days to come. In the mid­dle of the Pa­cific, tiny in­fu­so­ria build con­ti­nents, but here they’re built by vol­canic phe­nom­ena. Look, sir! Look at the con­struc­tion work go­ing on un­der these waves.”</p>
				<p>I re­turned to the win­dow. The <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i> was no longer mov­ing. The heat had be­come un­bear­able. From the white it had re­cently been, the sea was turn­ing red, a col­oration caused by the pres­ence of iron salts. Although the lounge was her­met­i­cally sealed, it was fill­ing with an in­tol­er­a­ble stink of sul­fur, and I could see scar­let flames of such bright­ness, they over­pow­ered our elec­tric light.</p>
				<p>I was swim­ming in per­spi­ra­tion, I was sti­fling, I was about to be cooked. Yes, I felt my­self cook­ing in ac­tual fact!</p>
				<p>“We can’t stay any longer in this boil­ing wa­ter,” I told the cap­tain.</p>
				<p>“No, it wouldn’t be ad­vis­able,” replied Nemo the Emo­tion­less.</p>
				<p>He gave an or­der. The <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i> tacked about and re­treated from this fur­nace it couldn’t brave with im­punity. A quar­ter of an hour later, we were breath­ing fresh air on the sur­face of the waves.</p>
				<p>It then oc­curred to me that if Ned had cho­sen these wa­ter­ways for our es­cape at­tempt, we wouldn’t have come out alive from this sea of fire.</p>
				<p>The next day, Fe­bru­ary 16, we left this basin, which tal­lies depths of 3,000 me­ters be­tween Rhodes and Alexan­dria, and pass­ing well out from Cerigo Is­land af­ter dou­bling Cape Mat­a­pan, the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i> left the Greek Is­lands be­hind.</p>
			</section>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
