<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="en-US" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: http://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Chapter 1</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="part-1" epub:type="part">
			<section id="chapter-1-1" epub:type="chapter">
				<h3 epub:type="title">
					<span class="first-child" epub:type="z3998:roman">I</span>
					<span class="epub-type-subtitle" epub:type="subtitle">A Runaway Reef</span>
				</h3>
				<p>The year 1866 was marked by a bizarre de­vel­op­ment, an un­ex­plained and down­right in­ex­pli­ca­ble phe­nom­e­non that surely no one has for­got­ten. Without get­ting into those ru­mors that up­set civil­ians in the sea­ports and de­ranged the pub­lic mind even far in­land, it must be said that pro­fes­sional sea­men were es­pe­cially alarmed. Traders, shipown­ers, cap­tains of ves­sels, skip­pers, and mas­ter mariners from Europe and Amer­ica, naval of­fi­cers from ev­ery coun­try, and at their heels the var­i­ous na­tional gov­ern­ments on these two con­ti­nents, were all ex­tremely dis­turbed by the busi­ness.</p>
				<p>In essence, over a pe­riod of time sev­eral ships had en­coun­tered “an enor­mous thing” at sea, a long spin­dle-shaped ob­ject, some­times giv­ing off a phos­pho­res­cent glow, in­fin­itely big­ger and faster than any whale.</p>
				<p>The rel­e­vant data on this ap­pari­tion, as recorded in var­i­ous log­books, agreed pretty closely as to the struc­ture of the ob­ject or crea­ture in ques­tion, its un­prece­dented speed of move­ment, its star­tling lo­co­mo­tive power, and the unique vi­tal­ity with which it seemed to be gifted. If it was a cetacean, it ex­ceeded in bulk any whale pre­vi­ously clas­si­fied by sci­ence. No nat­u­ral­ist, nei­ther Cu­vier nor Lacépède, nei­ther Pro­fes­sor Dumeril nor Pro­fes­sor de Qu­a­tre­fages, would have ac­cepted the ex­is­tence of such a mon­ster sight un­seen—specif­i­cally, un­seen by their own sci­en­tific eyes.</p>
				<p>Strik­ing an av­er­age of ob­ser­va­tions taken at dif­fer­ent times—re­ject­ing those timid es­ti­mates that gave the ob­ject a length of 200 feet, and ig­nor­ing those ex­ag­ger­ated views that saw it as a mile wide and three long—you could still as­sert that this phe­nom­e­nal crea­ture greatly ex­ceeded the di­men­sions of any­thing then known to ichthy­ol­o­gists, if it ex­isted at all.</p>
				<p>Now then, it did ex­ist, this was an un­de­ni­able fact; and since the hu­man mind dotes on ob­jects of won­der, you can un­der­stand the world­wide ex­cite­ment caused by this un­earthly ap­pari­tion. As for rel­e­gat­ing it to the realm of fic­tion, that charge had to be dropped.</p>
				<p>In essence, on July 20, 1866, the steamer <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Gover­nor Hig­gin­son</i>, from the Cal­cutta &amp; Bur­nach Steam Nav­i­ga­tion Co., en­coun­tered this mov­ing mass five miles off the east­ern shores of Aus­tralia.</p>
				<p>Cap­tain Baker at first thought he was in the pres­ence of an un­known reef; he was even about to fix its ex­act po­si­tion when two wa­ter­spouts shot out of this in­ex­pli­ca­ble ob­ject and sprang hiss­ing into the air some 150 feet. So, un­less this reef was sub­ject to the in­ter­mit­tent erup­tions of a geyser, the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Gover­nor Hig­gin­son</i> had fair and hon­est deal­ings with some aquatic mam­mal, un­til then un­known, that could spurt from its blow­holes wa­ter­spouts mixed with air and steam.</p>
				<p>Sim­i­lar events were like­wise ob­served in Pa­cific seas, on July 23 of the same year, by the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Christo­pher Colum­bus</i> from the West In­dia &amp; Pa­cific Steam Nav­i­ga­tion Co. Con­se­quently, this ex­tra­or­di­nary cetacean could trans­fer it­self from one lo­cal­ity to an­other with star­tling swift­ness, since within an in­ter­val of just three days, the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Gover­nor Hig­gin­son</i> and the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Christo­pher Colum­bus</i> had ob­served it at two po­si­tions on the charts sep­a­rated by a dis­tance of more than 700 nau­ti­cal leagues.</p>
				<p>Fif­teen days later and 2,000 leagues far­ther, the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Hel­ve­tia</i> from the Com­pag­nie Na­tionale and the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Shan­non</i> from the Royal Mail line, run­ning on op­po­site tacks in that part of the At­lantic ly­ing be­tween the United States and Europe, re­spec­tively sig­naled each other that the mon­ster had been sighted in lat­i­tude 42° 15′ north and lon­gi­tude 60° 35′ west of the merid­ian of Green­wich. From their si­mul­ta­ne­ous ob­ser­va­tions, they were able to es­ti­mate the mam­mal’s min­i­mum length at more than 350 English feet;<a class="epub-type-noteref" href="../text/endnotes.xhtml#note-1" id="note-1" epub:type="noteref">1</a> this was be­cause both the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Shan­non</i> and the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Hel­ve­tia</i> were of smaller di­men­sions, al­though each mea­sured 100 me­ters stem to stern. Now then, the big­gest whales, those rorqual whales that fre­quent the wa­ter­ways of the Aleu­tian Is­lands, have never ex­ceeded a length of 56 me­ters—if they reach even that.</p>
				<p>One af­ter an­other, re­ports ar­rived that would pro­foundly af­fect pub­lic opin­ion: new ob­ser­va­tions taken by the transat­lantic liner <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Pereire</i>, the In­man line’s <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Etna</i> run­ning afoul of the mon­ster, an of­fi­cial re­port drawn up by of­fi­cers on the French frigate <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nor­mandy</i>, dead-earnest reck­on­ings ob­tained by the gen­eral staff of Com­modore Fitz-James aboard the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Lord Clyde</i>. In light­hearted coun­tries, peo­ple joked about this phe­nom­e­non, but such se­ri­ous, prac­ti­cal coun­tries as Eng­land, Amer­ica, and Ger­many were deeply con­cerned.</p>
				<p>In ev­ery big city the mon­ster was the lat­est rage; they sang about it in the cof­fee houses, they ridiculed it in the news­pa­pers, they dra­ma­tized it in the the­aters. The tabloids found it a fine op­por­tu­nity for hatch­ing all sorts of hoaxes. In those news­pa­pers short of copy, you saw the reap­pear­ance of ev­ery gi­gan­tic imag­i­nary crea­ture, from <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Moby Dick</i>, that dread­ful white whale from the High Arc­tic re­gions, to the stu­pen­dous kraken whose ten­ta­cles could en­twine a 500-ton craft and drag it into the ocean depths. They even reprinted re­ports from an­cient times: the views of Aris­to­tle and Pliny ac­cept­ing the ex­is­tence of such mon­sters, then the Nor­we­gian sto­ries of Bishop Pon­top­p­i­dan, the nar­ra­tives of Paul Egede, and fi­nally the re­ports of Cap­tain Har­ring­ton—whose good faith is above sus­pi­cion—in which he claims he saw, while aboard the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Castil­ian</i> in 1857, one of those enor­mous ser­pents that, un­til then, had fre­quented only the seas of France’s old ex­trem­ist news­pa­per, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.newspaper">The Con­sti­tu­tion­al­ist</i>.</p>
				<p>An in­ter­minable de­bate then broke out be­tween be­liev­ers and skep­tics in the schol­arly so­ci­eties and sci­en­tific jour­nals. The “mon­ster ques­tion” in­flamed all minds. Dur­ing this mem­o­rable cam­paign, jour­nal­ists mak­ing a pro­fes­sion of sci­ence bat­tled with those mak­ing a pro­fes­sion of wit, spilling waves of ink and some of them even two or three drops of blood, since they went from sea ser­pents to the most of­fen­sive per­sonal re­marks.</p>
				<p>For six months the war see­sawed. With in­ex­haustible zest, the pop­u­lar press took pot­shots at fea­ture ar­ti­cles from the Geo­graphic In­sti­tute of Brazil, the Royal Academy of Science in Ber­lin, the Bri­tish As­so­ci­a­tion, the Smith­so­nian In­sti­tu­tion in Wash­ing­ton, DC, at dis­cus­sions in The In­dian Archipelago, in <i epub:type="se:name.publication.newspaper">Cos­mos</i> pub­lished by Father Moigno, in Peter­mann’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.newspaper">Mit­theilun­gen</i><a class="epub-type-noteref" href="../text/endnotes.xhtml#note-2" id="note-2" epub:type="noteref">2</a>, and at sci­en­tific chron­i­cles in the great French and for­eign news­pa­pers. When the mon­ster’s de­trac­tors cited a say­ing by the botanist Lin­naeus that “na­ture doesn’t make leaps,” witty writ­ers in the pop­u­lar pe­ri­od­i­cals par­o­died it, main­tain­ing in essence that “na­ture doesn’t make lu­natics,” and or­der­ing their con­tem­po­raries never to give the lie to na­ture by be­liev­ing in krak­ens, sea ser­pents, Moby Dicks, and other all-out ef­forts from drunken sea­men. Fi­nally, in a much-feared satir­i­cal jour­nal, an ar­ti­cle by its most pop­u­lar colum­nist fin­ished off the mon­ster for good, spurn­ing it in the style of Hip­poly­tus re­puls­ing the amorous ad­vances of his step­mother Phae­dra, and giv­ing the crea­ture its qui­etus amid a uni­ver­sal burst of laugh­ter. Wit had de­feated sci­ence.</p>
				<p>Dur­ing the first months of the year 1867, the ques­tion seemed to be buried, and it didn’t seem due for res­ur­rec­tion, when new facts were brought to the pub­lic’s at­ten­tion. But now it was no longer an is­sue of a sci­en­tific prob­lem to be solved, but a quite real and se­ri­ous dan­ger to be avoided. The ques­tion took an en­tirely new turn. The mon­ster again be­came an islet, rock, or reef, but a run­away reef, un­fixed and elu­sive.</p>
				<p>On March 5, 1867, the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Mo­ra­vian</i> from the Mon­treal Ocean Co., ly­ing dur­ing the night in lat­i­tude 27° 30′ and lon­gi­tude 72° 15′, ran its star­board quar­ter afoul of a rock marked on no charts of these wa­ter­ways. Un­der the com­bined ef­forts of wind and 400-horse­power steam, it was trav­el­ing at a speed of thir­teen knots. Without the high qual­ity of its hull, the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Mo­ra­vian</i> would surely have split open from this col­li­sion and gone down to­gether with those 237 pas­sen­gers it was bring­ing back from Canada.</p>
				<p>This ac­ci­dent hap­pened around five o’clock in the morn­ing, just as day was be­gin­ning to break. The of­fi­cers on watch rushed to the craft’s stern. They ex­am­ined the ocean with the most scrupu­lous care. They saw noth­ing ex­cept a strong eddy break­ing three ca­ble lengths out, as if those sheets of wa­ter had been vi­o­lently churned. The site’s ex­act bear­ings were taken, and the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Mo­ra­vian</i> con­tin­ued on course ap­par­ently un­dam­aged. Had it run afoul of an un­der­wa­ter rock or the wreck­age of some enor­mous derelict ship? They were un­able to say. But when they ex­am­ined its un­der­sides in the ser­vice yard, they dis­cov­ered that part of its keel had been smashed.</p>
				<p>This oc­cur­rence, ex­tremely se­ri­ous in it­self, might per­haps have been for­got­ten like so many oth­ers, if three weeks later it hadn’t been reen­acted un­der iden­ti­cal con­di­tions. Only, thanks to the na­tion­al­ity of the ship vic­tim­ized by this new ram­ming, and thanks to the rep­u­ta­tion of the com­pany to which this ship be­longed, the event caused an im­mense up­roar.</p>
				<p>No one is un­aware of the name of that fa­mous English shipowner, Cu­nard. In 1840 this shrewd in­dus­tri­al­ist founded a postal ser­vice be­tween Liver­pool and Hal­i­fax, fea­tur­ing three wooden ships with 400-horse­power pad­dle wheels and a bur­den of 1,162 met­ric tons. Eight years later, the com­pany’s as­sets were in­creased by four 650-horse­power ships at 1,820 met­ric tons, and in two more years, by two other ves­sels of still greater power and ton­nage. In 1853 the Cu­nard Co., whose mail-car­ry­ing char­ter had just been re­newed, suc­ces­sively added to its as­sets the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Ara­bia</i>, the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Per­sia</i>, the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">China</i>, the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Sco­tia</i>, the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Java</i>, and the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Rus­sia</i>, all ships of top speed and, af­ter the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Great Eastern</i>, the big­gest ever to plow the seas. So in 1867 this com­pany owned twelve ships, eight with pad­dle wheels and four with pro­pel­lers.</p>
				<p>If I give these highly con­densed de­tails, it is so ev­ery­one can fully un­der­stand the im­por­tance of this mar­itime trans­porta­tion com­pany, known the world over for its shrewd man­age­ment. No transoceanic nav­i­ga­tional un­der­tak­ing has been con­ducted with more abil­ity, no busi­ness deal­ings have been crowned with greater suc­cess. In twenty-six years Cu­nard ships have made 2,000 At­lantic cross­ings with­out so much as a voy­age can­celed, a de­lay recorded, a man, a craft, or even a let­ter lost. Ac­cord­ingly, de­spite strong com­pe­ti­tion from France, pas­sen­gers still choose the Cu­nard line in pref­er­ence to all oth­ers, as can be seen in a re­cent sur­vey of of­fi­cial doc­u­ments. Given this, no one will be as­ton­ished at the up­roar pro­voked by this ac­ci­dent in­volv­ing one of its finest steam­ers.</p>
				<p>On April 13, 1867, with a smooth sea and a mod­er­ate breeze, the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Sco­tia</i> lay in lon­gi­tude 15° 12′ and lat­i­tude 45° 37′. It was trav­el­ing at a speed of 13.43 knots un­der the thrust of its 1,000-horse­power en­gines. Its pad­dle wheels were churn­ing the sea with per­fect steadi­ness. It was then draw­ing 6.7 me­ters of wa­ter and dis­plac­ing 6,624 cu­bic me­ters.</p>
				<p>At 4:17 in the af­ter­noon, dur­ing a high tea for pas­sen­gers gath­ered in the main lounge, a col­li­sion oc­curred, scarcely no­tice­able on the whole, af­fect­ing the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Sco­tia</i>’s hull in that quar­ter a lit­tle astern of its port pad­dle wheel.</p>
				<p>The <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Sco­tia</i> hadn’t run afoul of some­thing, it had been fouled, and by a cut­ting or per­fo­rat­ing in­stru­ment rather than a blunt one. This en­counter seemed so mi­nor that no­body on board would have been dis­turbed by it, had it not been for the shouts of crew­men in the hold, who climbed on deck yelling:</p>
				<p>“We’re sink­ing! We’re sink­ing!”</p>
				<p>At first the pas­sen­gers were quite fright­ened, but Cap­tain An­der­son has­tened to re­as­sure them. In fact, there could be no im­me­di­ate dan­ger. Di­vided into seven com­part­ments by wa­ter­tight bulk­heads, the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Sco­tia</i> could brave any leak with im­punity.</p>
				<p>Cap­tain An­der­son im­me­di­ately made his way into the hold. He dis­cov­ered that the fifth com­part­ment had been in­vaded by the sea, and the speed of this in­va­sion proved that the leak was con­sid­er­able. For­tu­nately this com­part­ment didn’t con­tain the boil­ers, be­cause their fur­naces would have been abruptly ex­tin­guished.</p>
				<p>Cap­tain An­der­son called an im­me­di­ate halt, and one of his sailors dived down to as­sess the dam­age. Within mo­ments they had lo­cated a hole two me­ters in width on the steamer’s un­der­side. Such a leak could not be patched, and with its pad­dle wheels half swamped, the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Sco­tia</i> had no choice but to con­tinue its voy­age. By then it lay 300 miles from Cape Clear, and af­ter three days of de­lay that filled Liver­pool with acute anx­i­ety, it en­tered the com­pany docks.</p>
				<p>The en­gi­neers then pro­ceeded to in­spect the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Sco­tia</i>, which had been put in dry dock. They couldn’t be­lieve their eyes. Two and a half me­ters be­low its wa­ter­line, there gaped a sym­met­ri­cal gash in the shape of an isosce­les tri­an­gle. This breach in the sheet iron was so per­fectly formed, no punch could have done a cleaner job of it. Con­se­quently, it must have been pro­duced by a per­fo­rat­ing tool of un­com­mon tough­ness—plus, af­ter be­ing launched with prodi­gious power and then pierc­ing four cen­time­ters of sheet iron, this tool had needed to with­draw it­self by a back­ward mo­tion truly in­ex­pli­ca­ble.</p>
				<p>This was the last straw, and it re­sulted in arous­ing pub­lic pas­sions all over again. In­deed, from this mo­ment on, any mar­itime ca­su­alty with­out an es­tab­lished cause was charged to the mon­ster’s ac­count. This out­ra­geous an­i­mal had to shoul­der re­spon­si­bil­ity for all derelict ves­sels, whose num­bers are un­for­tu­nately con­sid­er­able, since out of those 3,000 ships whose losses are recorded an­nu­ally at the ma­rine in­sur­ance bu­reau, the fig­ure for steam or sail­ing ships sup­pos­edly lost with all hands, in the ab­sence of any news, amounts to at least 200!</p>
				<p>Now then, justly or un­justly, it was the “mon­ster” who stood ac­cused of their dis­ap­pear­ance; and since, thanks to it, travel be­tween the var­i­ous con­ti­nents had be­come more and more dan­ger­ous, the pub­lic spoke up and de­manded straight out that, at all cost, the seas be purged of this fear­some cetacean.</p>
			</section>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
