<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="en-US" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: http://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Chapter 6</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="part-1" epub:type="part">
			<section id="chapter-1-6" epub:type="chapter">
				<h3 epub:type="title">
					<span class="first-child" epub:type="z3998:roman">VI</span>
					<span class="epub-type-subtitle" epub:type="subtitle">At Full Steam</span>
				</h3>
				<p>At this shout the en­tire crew rushed to­ward the har­pooner—com­man­der, of­fi­cers, mates, sailors, cabin boys, down to en­gi­neers leav­ing their ma­chin­ery and stok­ers ne­glect­ing their fur­naces. The or­der was given to stop, and the frigate merely coasted.</p>
				<p>By then the dark­ness was pro­found, and as good as the Cana­dian’s eyes were, I still won­dered how he could see—and what he had seen. My heart was pound­ing fit to burst.</p>
				<p>But Ned Land was not mis­taken, and we all spot­ted the ob­ject his hand was in­di­cat­ing.</p>
				<p>Two ca­ble lengths off the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Abra­ham Lin­coln</i>’s star­board quar­ter, the sea seemed to be lit up from un­der­neath. This was no mere phos­pho­res­cent phe­nom­e­non, that much was un­mis­tak­able. Sub­merged some fath­oms be­low the sur­face of the wa­ter, the mon­ster gave off that very in­tense but in­ex­pli­ca­ble glow that sev­eral cap­tains had men­tioned in their re­ports. This mag­nif­i­cent ra­di­ance had to come from some force with a great il­lu­mi­nat­ing ca­pac­ity. The edge of its light swept over the sea in an im­mense, highly elon­gated oval, con­dens­ing at the cen­ter into a blaz­ing core whose un­bear­able glow di­min­ished by de­grees out­ward.</p>
				<p>“It’s only a clus­ter of phos­pho­res­cent par­ti­cles!” ex­claimed one of the of­fi­cers.</p>
				<p>“No, sir,” I an­swered with con­vic­tion. “Not even an­gel-wing clams or salps have ever given off such a pow­er­ful light. That glow is ba­si­cally elec­tric in na­ture. Be­sides … look, look! It’s shift­ing! It’s mov­ing back and forth! It’s dart­ing at us!”</p>
				<p>A uni­ver­sal shout went up from the frigate.</p>
				<p>“Quiet!” Com­man­der Far­ragut said. “Helm hard to lee­ward! Re­v­erse en­gines!”</p>
				<p>Sailors rushed to the helm, en­gi­neers to their ma­chin­ery. Un­der re­verse steam im­me­di­ately, the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Abra­ham Lin­coln</i> beat to port, sweep­ing in a semi­cir­cle.</p>
				<p>“Right your helm! Engines for­ward!” Com­man­der Far­ragut called.</p>
				<p>Th­ese or­ders were ex­e­cuted, and the frigate swiftly re­treated from this core of light.</p>
				<p>My mis­take. It wanted to re­treat, but the un­earthly an­i­mal came at us with a speed dou­ble our own.</p>
				<p>We gasped. More stunned than afraid, we stood mute and mo­tion­less. The an­i­mal caught up with us, played with us. It made a full cir­cle around the frigate—then do­ing four­teen knots—and wrapped us in sheets of elec­tric­ity that were like lu­mi­nous dust. Then it re­treated two or three miles, leav­ing a phos­pho­res­cent trail com­pa­ra­ble to those swirls of steam that shoot be­hind the lo­co­mo­tive of an ex­press train. Sud­denly, all the way from the dark hori­zon where it had gone to gather mo­men­tum, the mon­ster abruptly dashed to­ward the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Abra­ham Lin­coln</i> with fright­en­ing speed, stopped sharply twenty feet from our side plates, and died out—not by div­ing un­der the wa­ter, since its glow did not re­cede grad­u­ally—but all at once, as if the source of this bril­liant em­a­na­tion had sud­denly dried up. Then it reap­peared on the other side of the ship, ei­ther by cir­cling around us or by glid­ing un­der our hull. At any in­stant a col­li­sion could have oc­curred that would have been fa­tal to us.</p>
				<p>Mean­while I was as­ton­ished at the frigate’s ma­neu­vers. It was flee­ing, not fight­ing. Built to pur­sue, it was be­ing pur­sued, and I com­mented on this to Com­man­der Far­ragut. His face, or­di­nar­ily so emo­tion­less, was stamped with in­de­scrib­able as­ton­ish­ment.</p>
				<p>“Pro­fes­sor Aron­nax,” he an­swered me, “I don’t know what kind of fear­some crea­ture I’m up against, and I don’t want my frigate run­ning fool­ish risks in all this dark­ness. Be­sides, how should we at­tack this un­known crea­ture, how should we de­fend our­selves against it? Let’s wait for day­light, and then we’ll play a dif­fer­ent role.”</p>
				<p>“You’ve no fur­ther doubts, com­man­der, as to the na­ture of this an­i­mal?”</p>
				<p>“No, sir, it’s ap­par­ently a gi­gan­tic nar­whale, and an elec­tric one to boot.”</p>
				<p>“Maybe,” I added, “it’s no more ap­proach­able than an elec­tric eel or an elec­tric ray!”</p>
				<p>“Right,” the com­man­der replied. “And if it has their power to elec­tro­cute, it’s surely the most dread­ful an­i­mal ever con­ceived by our Creator. That’s why I’ll keep on my guard, sir.”</p>
				<p>The whole crew stayed on their feet all night long. No one even thought of sleep­ing. Un­able to com­pete with the mon­ster’s speed, the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Abra­ham Lin­coln</i> slowed down and stayed at half steam. For its part, the nar­whale mim­icked the frigate, sim­ply rode with the waves, and seemed de­ter­mined not to for­sake the field of bat­tle.</p>
				<p>How­ever, near mid­night it dis­ap­peared, or to use a more ap­pro­pri­ate ex­pres­sion, “it went out,” like a huge glow­worm. Had it fled from us? We were duty bound to fear so rather than hope so. But at 12:53 in the morn­ing, a deaf­en­ing hiss be­came au­di­ble, re­sem­bling the sound made by a wa­ter­spout ex­pelled with tremen­dous in­ten­sity.</p>
				<p>By then Com­man­der Far­ragut, Ned Land, and I were on the af­ter­deck, peer­ing ea­gerly into the pro­found gloom.</p>
				<p>“Ned Land,” the com­man­der asked, “you’ve of­ten heard whales bel­low­ing?”</p>
				<p>“Often, sir, but never a whale like this, whose sight­ing earned me $2,000.”</p>
				<p>“Cor­rect, the prize is right­fully yours. But tell me, isn’t that the noise cetaceans make when they spurt wa­ter from their blow­holes?”</p>
				<p>“The very noise, sir, but this one’s way louder. So there can be no mis­take. There’s def­i­nitely a whale lurk­ing in our wa­ters. With your per­mis­sion, sir,” the har­pooner added, “to­mor­row at day­break we’ll have words with it.”</p>
				<p>“If it’s in a mood to lis­ten to you, Mr. Land,” I replied in a tone far from con­vinced.</p>
				<p>“Let me get within four har­poon lengths of it,” the Cana­dian shot back, “and it had bet­ter lis­ten!”</p>
				<p>“But to get near it,” the com­man­der went on, “I’d have to put a whale­boat at your dis­posal?”</p>
				<p>“Cer­tainly, sir.”</p>
				<p>“That would be gam­bling with the lives of my men.”</p>
				<p>“And with my own!” the har­pooner replied sim­ply.</p>
				<p>Near two o’clock in the morn­ing, the core of light reap­peared, no less in­tense, five miles to wind­ward of the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Abra­ham Lin­coln</i>. De­spite the dis­tance, de­spite the noise of wind and sea, we could dis­tinctly hear the fear­some thrash­ings of the an­i­mal’s tail, and even its pant­ing breath. Seem­ingly, the mo­ment this enor­mous nar­whale came up to breathe at the sur­face of the ocean, air was sucked into its lungs like steam into the huge cylin­ders of a 2,000-horse­power en­gine.</p>
				<p>“Hmm!” I said to my­self. “A cetacean as pow­er­ful as a whole cav­alry reg­i­ment—now that’s a whale of a whale!”</p>
				<p>We stayed on the alert un­til day­light, get­ting ready for ac­tion. Whal­ing gear was set up along the rail­ings. Our chief of­fi­cer loaded the blun­der­busses, which can launch har­poons as far as a mile, and long duck guns with ex­plod­ing bul­lets that can mor­tally wound even the most pow­er­ful an­i­mals. Ned Land was con­tent to sharpen his har­poon, a dread­ful weapon in his hands.</p>
				<p>At six o’clock day be­gan to break, and with the dawn’s early light, the nar­whale’s elec­tric glow dis­ap­peared. At seven o’clock the day was well along, but a very dense morn­ing mist shrank the hori­zon, and our best spy­glasses were un­able to pierce it. The out­come: dis­ap­point­ment and anger.</p>
				<p>I hoisted my­self up to the crosstrees of the mizzen sail. Some of­fi­cers were al­ready perched on the mast­heads.</p>
				<p>At eight o’clock the mist rolled pon­der­ously over the waves, and its huge curls were lift­ing lit­tle by lit­tle. The hori­zon grew wider and clearer all at once.</p>
				<p>Sud­denly, just as on the pre­vi­ous evening, Ned Land’s voice was au­di­ble.</p>
				<p>“There’s the thing in ques­tion, astern to port!” the har­pooner shouted.</p>
				<p>Every eye looked to­ward the point in­di­cated.</p>
				<p>There, a mile and a half from the frigate, a long black­ish body emerged a me­ter above the waves. Quiv­er­ing vi­o­lently, its tail was cre­at­ing a con­sid­er­able eddy. Never had cau­dal equip­ment thrashed the sea with such power. An im­mense wake of glow­ing white­ness marked the an­i­mal’s track, sweep­ing in a long curve.</p>
				<p>Our frigate drew nearer to the cetacean. I ex­am­ined it with a com­pletely open mind. Those re­ports from the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Shan­non</i> and the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Hel­ve­tia</i> had slightly ex­ag­ger­ated its di­men­sions, and I put its length at only 250 feet. Its girth was more dif­fi­cult to judge, but all in all, the an­i­mal seemed to be won­der­fully pro­por­tioned in all three di­men­sions.</p>
				<p>While I was ob­serv­ing this phe­nom­e­nal crea­ture, two jets of steam and wa­ter sprang from its blow­holes and rose to an al­ti­tude of forty me­ters, which set­tled for me its mode of breath­ing. From this I fi­nally con­cluded that it be­longed to the branch <i epub:type="z3998:taxonomy">Ver­te­brata</i>, class <i epub:type="z3998:taxonomy">Mam­malia</i>, sub­class <i epub:type="z3998:taxonomy">Mon­odel­phia</i>, group <i epub:type="z3998:taxonomy">Pis­ci­forma</i>, or­der <i epub:type="z3998:taxonomy">Ce­tacea</i>, fam­ily … but here I couldn’t make up my mind. The or­der <i epub:type="z3998:taxonomy">Ce­tacea</i> con­sists of three fam­i­lies, baleen whales, sperm whales, dol­phins, and it’s in this last group that nar­whales are placed. Each of these fam­i­lies is di­vided into sev­eral gen­era, each genus into species, each species into va­ri­eties. So I was still miss­ing va­ri­ety, species, genus, and fam­ily, but no doubt I would com­plete my clas­si­fy­ing with the aid of Heaven and Com­man­der Far­ragut.</p>
				<p>The crew were wait­ing im­pa­tiently for or­ders from their leader. The lat­ter, af­ter care­fully ob­serv­ing the an­i­mal, called for his en­gi­neer. The en­gi­neer raced over.</p>
				<p>“Sir,” the com­man­der said, “are you up to pres­sure?”</p>
				<p>“Aye, sir,” the en­gi­neer replied.</p>
				<p>“Fine. Stoke your fur­naces and clap on full steam!”</p>
				<p>Three cheers greeted this or­der. The hour of bat­tle had sounded. A few mo­ments later, the frigate’s two fun­nels vom­ited tor­rents of black smoke, and its deck quaked from the trem­bling of its boil­ers.</p>
				<p>Driven for­ward by its pow­er­ful pro­pel­ler, the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Abra­ham Lin­coln</i> headed straight for the an­i­mal. Un­con­cerned, the lat­ter let us come within half a ca­ble length; then, not both­er­ing to dive, it got up a lit­tle speed, re­treated, and was con­tent to keep its dis­tance.</p>
				<p>This chase dragged on for about three-quar­ters of an hour with­out the frigate gain­ing two fath­oms on the cetacean. At this rate, it was ob­vi­ous that we would never catch up with it.</p>
				<p>In­fu­ri­ated, Com­man­der Far­ragut kept twist­ing the thick tuft of hair that flour­ished be­low his chin.</p>
				<p>“Ned Land!” he called.</p>
				<p>The Cana­dian re­ported at once.</p>
				<p>“Well, Mr. Land,” the com­man­der asked, “do you still ad­vise putting my long­boats to sea?”</p>
				<p>“No, sir,” Ned Land replied, “be­cause that beast won’t be caught against its will.”</p>
				<p>“Then what should we do?”</p>
				<p>“Stoke up more steam, sir, if you can. As for me, with your per­mis­sion I’ll go perch on the bob­stays un­der the bowsprit, and if we can get within a har­poon length, I’ll har­poon the brute.”</p>
				<p>“Go to it, Ned,” Com­man­der Far­ragut replied. “Engi­neer,” he called, “keep the pres­sure mount­ing!”</p>
				<p>Ned Land made his way to his post. The fur­naces were urged into greater ac­tiv­ity; our pro­pel­ler did forty-three rev­o­lu­tions per minute, and steam shot from the valves. Heav­ing the log, we ver­i­fied that the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Abra­ham Lin­coln</i> was go­ing at the rate of 18.5 miles per hour.</p>
				<p>But that damned an­i­mal also did a speed of 18.5.</p>
				<p>For the next hour our frigate kept up this pace with­out gain­ing a fathom! This was hu­mil­i­at­ing for one of the fastest rac­ers in the Amer­i­can navy. The crew were work­ing up into a blind rage. Sailor af­ter sailor heaved in­sults at the mon­ster, which couldn’t be both­ered with an­swer­ing back. Com­man­der Far­ragut was no longer con­tent sim­ply to twist his goa­tee; he chewed on it.</p>
				<p>The en­gi­neer was sum­moned once again.</p>
				<p>“You’re up to max­i­mum pres­sure?” the com­man­der asked him.</p>
				<p>“Aye, sir,” the en­gi­neer replied.</p>
				<p>“And your valves are charged to … ?”</p>
				<p>“To six and a half at­mos­pheres.”</p>
				<p>“Charge them to ten at­mos­pheres.”</p>
				<p>A typ­i­cal Amer­i­can or­der if I ever heard one. It would have sounded just fine dur­ing some Mis­sis­sippi pad­dle-wheeler race, to “out­strip the com­pe­ti­tion!”</p>
				<p>“Con­seil,” I said to my gal­lant ser­vant, now at my side, “you re­al­ize that we’ll prob­a­bly blow our­selves sky­high?”</p>
				<p>“As mas­ter wishes!” Con­seil replied.</p>
				<p>All right, I ad­mit it: I did wish to run this risk!</p>
				<p>The valves were charged. More coal was swal­lowed by the fur­naces. Ven­ti­la­tors shot tor­rents of air over the bra­ziers. The <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Abra­ham Lin­coln</i>’s speed in­creased. Its masts trem­bled down to their blocks, and swirls of smoke could barely squeeze through the nar­row fun­nels.</p>
				<p>We heaved the log a sec­ond time.</p>
				<p>“Well, helms­man?” Com­man­der Far­ragut asked.</p>
				<p>“19.3 miles per hour, sir.”</p>
				<p>“Keep stok­ing the fur­naces.”</p>
				<p>The en­gi­neer did so. The pres­sure gauge marked ten at­mos­pheres. But no doubt the cetacean it­self had “warmed up,” be­cause with­out the least trou­ble, it also did 19.3.</p>
				<p>What a chase! No, I can’t de­scribe the ex­cite­ment that shook my very be­ing. Ned Land stayed at his post, har­poon in hand. Sev­eral times the an­i­mal let us ap­proach.</p>
				<p>“We’re over­haul­ing it!” the Cana­dian would shout.</p>
				<p>Then, just as he was about to strike, the cetacean would steal off with a swift­ness I could es­ti­mate at no less than thirty miles per hour. And even at our max­i­mum speed, it took the lib­erty of thumb­ing its nose at the frigate by run­ning a full cir­cle around us! A howl of fury burst from ev­ery throat!</p>
				<p>By noon we were no far­ther along than at eight o’clock in the morn­ing.</p>
				<p>Com­man­der Far­ragut then de­cided to use more di­rect meth­ods.</p>
				<p>“Bah!” he said. “So that an­i­mal is faster than the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Abra­ham Lin­coln</i>. All right, we’ll see if it can out­run our con­i­cal shells! Mate, man the gun in the bow!”</p>
				<p>Our fore­cas­tle can­non was im­me­di­ately loaded and lev­eled. The can­noneer fired a shot, but his shell passed some feet above the cetacean, which stayed half a mile off.</p>
				<p>“Over to some­body with bet­ter aim!” the com­man­der shouted. “And $500 to the man who can pierce that in­fer­nal beast!”</p>
				<p>Calm of eye, cool of fea­ture, an old gray-bearded gun­ner—I can see him to this day—ap­proached the can­non, put it in po­si­tion, and took aim for a good while. There was a mighty ex­plo­sion, min­gled with cheers from the crew.</p>
				<p>The shell reached its tar­get; it hit the an­i­mal, but not in the usual fash­ion—it bounced off that rounded sur­face and van­ished into the sea two miles out.</p>
				<p>“Oh drat!” said the old gun­ner in his anger. “That ras­cal must be cov­ered with six-inch ar­mor plate!”</p>
				<p>“Curse the beast!” Com­man­der Far­ragut shouted.</p>
				<p>The hunt was on again, and Com­man­der Far­ragut leaned over to me, say­ing:</p>
				<p>“I’ll chase that an­i­mal till my frigate ex­plodes!”</p>
				<p>“Yes,” I replied, “and no­body would blame you!”</p>
				<p>We could still hope that the an­i­mal would tire out and not be as in­sen­si­tive to ex­haus­tion as our steam en­gines. But no such luck. Hour af­ter hour went by with­out it show­ing the least sign of weari­ness.</p>
				<p>How­ever, to the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Abra­ham Lin­coln</i>’s credit, it must be said that we strug­gled on with tire­less per­sis­tence. I es­ti­mate that we cov­ered a dis­tance of at least 500 kilo­me­ters dur­ing this ill-fated day of Novem­ber 6. But night fell and wrapped the surg­ing ocean in its shad­ows.</p>
				<p>By then I thought our ex­pe­di­tion had come to an end, that we would never see this fan­tas­tic an­i­mal again. I was mis­taken.</p>
				<p>At 10:50 in the evening, that elec­tric light reap­peared three miles to wind­ward of the frigate, just as clear and in­tense as the night be­fore.</p>
				<p>The nar­whale seemed mo­tion­less. Was it asleep per­haps, weary from its work­day, just rid­ing with the waves? This was our chance, and Com­man­der Far­ragut was de­ter­mined to take full ad­van­tage of it.</p>
				<p>He gave his or­ders. The <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Abra­ham Lin­coln</i> stayed at half steam, ad­vanc­ing cau­tiously so as not to awaken its ad­ver­sary. In mi­do­cean it’s not un­usual to en­counter whales so sound asleep they can suc­cess­fully be at­tacked, and Ned Land had har­pooned more than one in its slum­ber. The Cana­dian went to re­sume his post on the bob­stays un­der the bowsprit.</p>
				<p>The frigate ap­proached with­out mak­ing a sound, stopped two ca­ble lengths from the an­i­mal and coasted. Not a soul breathed on board. A pro­found si­lence reigned over the deck. We were not 100 feet from the blaz­ing core of light, whose glow grew stronger and daz­zled the eyes.</p>
				<p>Just then, lean­ing over the fore­cas­tle rail­ing, I saw Ned Land be­low me, one hand grasp­ing the mar­tin­gale, the other bran­dish­ing his dread­ful har­poon. Barely twenty feet sep­a­rated him from the mo­tion­less an­i­mal.</p>
				<p>All at once his arm shot for­ward and the har­poon was launched. I heard the weapon col­lide res­o­nantly, as if it had hit some hard sub­stance.</p>
				<p>The elec­tric light sud­denly went out, and two enor­mous wa­ter­spouts crashed onto the deck of the frigate, rac­ing like a tor­rent from stem to stern, top­pling crew­men, break­ing spare masts and yardarms from their lash­ings.</p>
				<p>A hideous col­li­sion oc­curred, and thrown over the rail with no time to catch hold of it, I was hurled into the sea.</p>
			</section>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
