<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="en-US" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: http://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Chapter 13</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="part-2" epub:type="part">
			<section id="chapter-2-13" epub:type="chapter">
				<h3 epub:type="title">
					<span class="first-child" epub:type="z3998:roman">XIII</span>
					<span class="epub-type-subtitle" epub:type="subtitle">The Ice Bank</span>
				</h3>
				<p>The <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i> re­sumed its un­ruf­fled south­bound head­ing. It went along the 50th merid­ian with con­sid­er­able speed. Would it go to the pole? I didn’t think so, be­cause ev­ery pre­vi­ous at­tempt to reach this spot on the globe had failed. Be­sides, the sea­son was al­ready quite ad­vanced, since March 13 on Antarc­tic shores cor­re­sponds with Septem­ber 13 in the north­ern­most re­gions, which marks the be­gin­ning of the equinoc­tial pe­riod.</p>
				<p>On March 14 at lat­i­tude 55°, I spot­ted float­ing ice, plain pale bits of rub­ble twenty to twenty-five feet long, which formed reefs over which the sea burst into foam. The <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i> stayed on the sur­face of the ocean. Hav­ing fished in the Arc­tic seas, Ned Land was al­ready fa­mil­iar with the sight of ice­bergs. Con­seil and I were mar­veling at them for the first time.</p>
				<p>In the sky to­ward the south­ern hori­zon, there stretched a daz­zling white band. English whalers have given this the name “ice blink.” No mat­ter how heavy the clouds may be, they can’t ob­scure this phe­nom­e­non. It an­nounces the pres­ence of a pack, or shoal, of ice.</p>
				<p>In­deed, larger blocks of ice soon ap­peared, their bril­liance vary­ing at the whim of the mists. Some of these masses dis­played green veins, as if scrawled with un­du­lat­ing lines of cop­per sul­fate. Others looked like enor­mous amethysts, let­ting the light pen­e­trate their in­sides. The lat­ter re­flected the sun’s rays from the thou­sand facets of their crys­tals. The for­mer, tinted with a bright lime­stone sheen, would have sup­plied enough build­ing ma­te­rial to make a whole mar­ble town.</p>
				<p>The far­ther down south we went, the more these float­ing is­lands grew in num­bers and promi­nence. Po­lar birds nested on them by the thou­sands. Th­ese were pe­trels, cape pi­geons, or puffins, and their calls were deaf­en­ing. Mis­tak­ing the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i> for the corpse of a whale, some of them alighted on it and prod­ded its res­o­nant sheet iron with pecks of their beaks.</p>
				<p>Dur­ing this nav­i­gat­ing in the midst of the ice, Cap­tain Nemo of­ten stayed on the plat­form. He ob­served these de­serted wa­ter­ways care­fully. I saw his calm eyes some­times perk up. In these po­lar seas for­bid­den to man, did he feel right at home, the lord of these un­reach­able re­gions? Per­haps. But he didn’t say. He stood still, re­viv­ing only when his pi­lot’s in­stincts took over. Then, steer­ing his <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i> with con­sum­mate dex­ter­ity, he skill­fully dodged the masses of ice, some of which mea­sured sev­eral miles in length, their heights vary­ing from sev­enty to eighty me­ters. Often the hori­zon seemed com­pletely closed off. Abreast of lat­i­tude 60°, ev­ery pas­sage­way had dis­ap­peared. Search­ing with care, Cap­tain Nemo soon found a nar­row open­ing into which he brazenly slipped, well aware, how­ever, that it would close be­hind him.</p>
				<p>Guided by his skill­ful hands, the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i> passed by all these dif­fer­ent masses of ice, which are clas­si­fied by size and shape with a pre­ci­sion that en­rap­tured Con­seil: “ice­bergs,” or moun­tains; “ice fields,” or smooth, lim­it­less tracts; “drift ice,” or float­ing floes; “packs,” or bro­ken tracts, called “patches” when they’re cir­cu­lar and “streams” when they form long strips.</p>
				<p>The tem­per­a­ture was fairly low. Ex­posed to the out­side air, the ther­mome­ter marked −2° to −3° centi­grade. But we were warmly dressed in furs, for which seals and aquatic bears had paid the price. Evenly heated by all its elec­tric equip­ment, the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i>’s in­te­rior de­fied the most in­tense cold. More­over, to find a bear­able tem­per­a­ture, the ship had only to sink just a few me­ters be­neath the waves.</p>
				<p>Two months ear­lier we would have en­joyed per­pet­ual day­light in this lat­i­tude; but night al­ready fell for three or four hours, and later it would cast six months of shadow over these cir­cum­po­lar re­gions.</p>
				<p>On March 15 we passed be­yond the lat­i­tude of the South Shet­land and South Orkney Is­lands. The cap­tain told me that many tribes of seals used to in­habit these shores; but English and Amer­i­can whalers, in a frenzy of de­struc­tion, slaugh­tered all the adults, in­clud­ing preg­nant fe­males, and where life and ac­tiv­ity once ex­isted, those fish­er­men left be­hind only si­lence and death.</p>
				<p>Go­ing along the 55th merid­ian, the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i> cut the Antarc­tic Cir­cle on March 16 near eight o’clock in the morn­ing. Ice com­pletely sur­rounded us and closed off the hori­zon. Nev­er­the­less, Cap­tain Nemo went from pas­sage­way to pas­sage­way, al­ways pro­ceed­ing south.</p>
				<p>“But where’s he go­ing?” I asked.</p>
				<p>“Straight ahead,” Con­seil replied. “Ul­ti­mately, when he can’t go any far­ther, he’ll stop.”</p>
				<p>“I wouldn’t bet on it!” I replied.</p>
				<p>And in all hon­esty, I con­fess that this ven­ture­some ex­cur­sion was far from dis­pleas­ing to me. I can’t ex­press the in­ten­sity of my amaze­ment at the beau­ties of these new re­gions. The ice struck su­perb poses. Here, its gen­eral ef­fect sug­gested an ori­en­tal town with count­less minarets and mosques. There, a city in ru­ins, flung to the ground by con­vul­sions in the earth. Th­ese views were var­ied con­tin­u­ously by the sun’s oblique rays, or were com­pletely swal­lowed up by gray mists in the mid­dle of bliz­zards. Then ex­plo­sions, cave-ins, and great ice­berg som­er­saults would oc­cur all around us, al­ter­ing the scenery like the chang­ing land­scape in a dio­rama.</p>
				<p>If the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i> was sub­merged dur­ing these losses of bal­ance, we heard the re­sult­ing noises spread un­der the wa­ters with fright­ful in­ten­sity, and the col­lapse of these masses cre­ated daunt­ing ed­dies down to the ocean’s lower strata. The <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i> then rolled and pitched like a ship left to the fury of the el­e­ments.</p>
				<p>Often, no longer see­ing any way out, I thought we were im­pris­oned for good, but Cap­tain Nemo, guided by his in­stincts, dis­cov­ered new pas­sage­ways from the tini­est in­di­ca­tions. He was never wrong when he ob­served slen­der threads of bluish wa­ter streak­ing through these ice fields. Ac­cord­ingly, I was sure that he had al­ready risked his <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i> in the midst of the Antarc­tic seas.</p>
				<p>How­ever, dur­ing the day of March 16, these tracts of ice com­pletely barred our path. It wasn’t the Ice Bank as yet, just huge ice fields ce­mented to­gether by the cold. This ob­sta­cle couldn’t stop Cap­tain Nemo, and he launched his ship against the ice fields with hideous vi­o­lence. The <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i> went into these brit­tle masses like a wedge, split­ting them with dread­ful crack­lings. It was an old-fash­ioned bat­ter­ing ram pro­pelled with in­fi­nite power. Hurled aloft, ice rub­ble fell back around us like hail. Through brute force alone, the sub­mersible carved out a chan­nel for it­self. Car­ried away by its mo­men­tum, the ship some­times mounted on top of these tracts of ice and crushed them with its weight, or at other times, when cooped up be­neath the ice fields, it split them with sim­ple pitch­ing move­ments, cre­at­ing wide punc­tures.</p>
				<p>Vi­o­lent squalls as­saulted us dur­ing the day­time. Thanks to cer­tain heavy mists, we couldn’t see from one end of the plat­form to the other. The wind shifted abruptly to ev­ery point on the com­pass. The snow was pil­ing up in such packed lay­ers, it had to be chipped loose with blows from picks. Even in a tem­per­a­ture of merely −5° centi­grade, ev­ery out­side part of the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i> was cov­ered with ice. A ship’s rig­ging would have been un­us­able, be­cause all its tackle would have jammed in the grooves of the pul­leys. Only a craft with­out sails, driven by an elec­tric mo­tor that needed no coal, could face such high lat­i­tudes.</p>
				<p>Un­der these con­di­tions the barom­e­ter gen­er­ally stayed quite low. It fell as far as 73.5 cen­time­ters. Our com­pass in­di­ca­tions no longer of­fered any guar­an­tees. The de­ranged nee­dles would mark con­tra­dic­tory di­rec­tions as we ap­proached the south­ern mag­netic pole, which doesn’t co­in­cide with the South Pole proper. In fact, ac­cord­ing to the as­tronomer Hansteen, this mag­netic pole is lo­cated fairly close to lat­i­tude 70° and lon­gi­tude 130°, or abid­ing by the ob­ser­va­tions of Louis-Isi­dore Du­per­rey, in lon­gi­tude 135° and lat­i­tude 70° 30′. Hence we had to trans­port com­passes to dif­fer­ent parts of the ship, take many read­ings, and strike an av­er­age. Often we could chart our course only by guess­work, a less than sat­is­fac­tory method in the midst of these wind­ing pas­sage­ways whose land­marks change con­tin­u­ously.</p>
				<p>At last on March 18, af­ter twenty fu­tile as­saults, the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i> was de­ci­sively held in check. No longer was it an ice stream, patch, or field—it was an end­less, im­mov­able bar­rier formed by ice moun­tains fused to each other.</p>
				<p>“The Ice Bank!” the Cana­dian told me.</p>
				<p>For Ned Land, as well as for ev­ery nav­i­ga­tor be­fore us, I knew that this was the great in­sur­mount­able ob­sta­cle. When the sun ap­peared for an in­stant near noon, Cap­tain Nemo took a rea­son­ably ac­cu­rate sight that gave our po­si­tion as lon­gi­tude 51° 30′ and lat­i­tude 67° 39′ south. This was a po­si­tion al­ready well along in these Antarc­tic re­gions.</p>
				<p>As for the liq­uid sur­face of the sea, there was no longer any sem­blance of it be­fore our eyes. Be­fore the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i>’s spur there lay vast bro­ken plains, a tan­gle of con­fused chunks with all the hel­ter-skel­ter un­pre­dictabil­ity typ­i­cal of a river’s sur­face a short while be­fore its ice breakup; but in this case the pro­por­tions were gi­gan­tic. Here and there stood sharp peaks, lean spires that rose as high as 200 feet; far­ther off, a suc­ces­sion of steeply cut cliffs sport­ing a gray­ish tint, huge mir­rors that re­flected the sparse rays of a sun half drowned in mist. Beyond, a stark si­lence reigned in this des­o­late nat­u­ral set­ting, a si­lence barely bro­ken by the flap­ping wings of pe­trels or puffins. By this point ev­ery­thing was frozen, even sound.</p>
				<p>So the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i> had to halt in its ven­ture­some course among these tracts of ice.</p>
				<p>“Sir,” Ned Land told me that day, “if your cap­tain goes any far­ther …”</p>
				<p>“Yes?”</p>
				<p>“He’ll be a su­per­man.”</p>
				<p>“How so, Ned?”</p>
				<p>“Be­cause no­body can clear the Ice Bank. Your cap­tain’s a pow­er­ful man, but damna­tion, he isn’t more pow­er­ful than na­ture. If she draws a bound­ary line, there you stop, like it or not!”</p>
				<p>“Cor­rect, Ned Land, but I still want to know what’s be­hind this Ice Bank! Be­hold my great­est source of ir­ri­ta­tion—a wall!”</p>
				<p>“Master is right,” Con­seil said. “Walls were in­vented sim­ply to frus­trate sci­en­tists. All walls should be banned.”</p>
				<p>“Fine!” the Cana­dian put in. “But we al­ready know what’s be­hind this Ice Bank.”</p>
				<p>“What?” I asked.</p>
				<p>“Ice, ice, and more ice.”</p>
				<p>“You may be sure of that, Ned,” I an­swered, “but I’m not. That’s why I want to see for my­self.”</p>
				<p>“Well, pro­fes­sor,” the Cana­dian replied, “you can just drop that idea! You’ve made it to the Ice Bank, which is al­ready far enough, but you won’t get any far­ther, nei­ther your Cap­tain Nemo or his <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i>. And whether he wants to or not, we’ll head north again, in other words, to the land of sen­si­ble peo­ple.”</p>
				<p>I had to agree that Ned Land was right, and un­til ships are built to nav­i­gate over tracts of ice, they’ll have to stop at the Ice Bank.</p>
				<p>In­deed, de­spite its ef­forts, de­spite the pow­er­ful meth­ods it used to split this ice, the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i> was re­duced to im­mo­bil­ity. Or­di­nar­ily, when some­one can’t go any far­ther, he still has the op­tion of re­turn­ing in his tracks. But here it was just as im­pos­si­ble to turn back as to go for­ward, be­cause ev­ery pas­sage­way had closed be­hind us, and if our sub­mersible re­mained even slightly sta­tion­ary, it would be frozen in with­out de­lay. Which is ex­actly what hap­pened near two o’clock in the af­ter­noon, and fresh ice kept form­ing over the ship’s sides with as­ton­ish­ing speed. I had to ad­mit that Cap­tain Nemo’s lead­er­ship had been most in­ju­di­cious.</p>
				<p>Just then I was on the plat­form. Ob­serv­ing the sit­u­a­tion for some while, the cap­tain said to me:</p>
				<p>“Well, pro­fes­sor! What think you?”</p>
				<p>“I think we’re trapped, cap­tain.”</p>
				<p>“Trapped! What do you mean?”</p>
				<p>“I mean we can’t go for­ward, back­ward, or side­ways. I think that’s the stan­dard def­i­ni­tion of ‘trapped,’ at least in the civ­i­lized world.”</p>
				<p>“So, Pro­fes­sor Aron­nax, you think the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i> won’t be able to float clear?”</p>
				<p>“Only with the great­est dif­fi­culty, cap­tain, since the sea­son is al­ready too ad­vanced for you to de­pend on an ice breakup.”</p>
				<p>“Oh, pro­fes­sor,” Cap­tain Nemo replied in an ironic tone, “you never change! You see only im­ped­i­ments and ob­sta­cles! I prom­ise you, not only will the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i> float clear, it will go far­ther still!”</p>
				<p>“Farther south?” I asked, gap­ing at the cap­tain.</p>
				<p>“Yes, sir, it will go to the pole.”</p>
				<p>“To the pole!” I ex­claimed, un­able to keep back a move­ment of dis­be­lief.</p>
				<p>“Yes,” the cap­tain replied coolly, “the Antarc­tic pole, that un­known spot crossed by ev­ery merid­ian on the globe. As you know, I do what­ever I like with my <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i>.”</p>
				<p>Yes, I did know that! I knew this man was dar­ing to the point of be­ing fool­hardy. But to over­come all the ob­sta­cles around the South Pole—even more unattain­able than the North Pole, which still hadn’t been reached by the bold­est nav­i­ga­tors—wasn’t this an ab­so­lutely in­sane un­der­tak­ing, one that could oc­cur only in the brain of a mad­man?</p>
				<p>It then dawned on me to ask Cap­tain Nemo if he had al­ready dis­cov­ered this pole, which no hu­man be­ing had ever trod un­der­foot.</p>
				<p>“No, sir,” he an­swered me, “but we’ll dis­cover it to­gether. Where oth­ers have failed, I’ll suc­ceed. Never be­fore has my <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i> cruised so far into these south­ern­most seas, but I re­peat: it will go far­ther still.”</p>
				<p>“I’d like to be­lieve you, cap­tain,” I went on in a tone of some sar­casm. “Oh I do be­lieve you! Let’s forge ahead! There are no ob­sta­cles for us! Let’s shat­ter this Ice Bank! Let’s blow it up, and if it still re­sists, let’s put wings on the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i> and fly over it!”</p>
				<p>“Over it, pro­fes­sor?” Cap­tain Nemo replied serenely. “No, not over it, but un­der it.”</p>
				<p>“Un­der it!” I ex­claimed.</p>
				<p>A sud­den in­sight into Cap­tain Nemo’s plans had just flashed through my mind. I un­der­stood. The mar­velous tal­ents of his <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i> would be put to work once again in this su­per­hu­man un­der­tak­ing!</p>
				<p>“I can see we’re start­ing to un­der­stand each other, pro­fes­sor,” Cap­tain Nemo told me with a half smile. “You al­ready glimpse the po­ten­tial—my­self, I’d say the suc­cess—of this at­tempt. Ma­neu­vers that aren’t fea­si­ble for an or­di­nary ship are easy for the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i>. If a con­ti­nent emerges at the pole, we’ll stop at that con­ti­nent. But on the other hand, if open sea washes the pole, we’ll go to that very place!”</p>
				<p>“Right,” I said, car­ried away by the cap­tain’s logic. “Even though the sur­face of the sea has so­lid­i­fied into ice, its lower strata are still open, thanks to that di­vine jus­tice that puts the max­i­mum den­sity of salt wa­ter one de­gree above its freez­ing point. And if I’m not mis­taken, the sub­merged part of this Ice Bank is in a four-to-one ra­tio to its emerg­ing part.”</p>
				<p>“Very nearly, pro­fes­sor. For each foot of ice­berg above the sea, there are three more be­low. Now then, since these ice moun­tains don’t ex­ceed a height of 100 me­ters, they sink only to a depth of 300 me­ters. And what are 300 me­ters to the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i>?”</p>
				<p>“A mere noth­ing, sir.”</p>
				<p>“We could even go to greater depths and find that tem­per­a­ture layer com­mon to all ocean wa­ter, and there we’d brave with im­punity the −30° or −40° cold on the sur­face.”</p>
				<p>“True, sir, very true,” I replied with grow­ing ex­cite­ment.</p>
				<p>“Our sole dif­fi­culty,” Cap­tain Nemo went on, “lies in our stay­ing sub­merged for sev­eral days with­out re­new­ing our air sup­ply.”</p>
				<p>“That’s all?” I an­swered. “The <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i> has huge air tanks; we’ll fill them up and they’ll sup­ply all the oxy­gen we need.”</p>
				<p>“Good think­ing, Pro­fes­sor Aron­nax,” the cap­tain replied with a smile. “But since I don’t want to be ac­cused of fool­har­di­ness, I’m giv­ing you all my ob­jec­tions in ad­vance.”</p>
				<p>“You have more?”</p>
				<p>“Just one. If a sea ex­ists at the South Pole, it’s pos­si­ble this sea may be com­pletely frozen over, so we couldn’t come up to the sur­face!”</p>
				<p>“My dear sir, have you for­got­ten that the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i> is armed with a fear­some spur? Couldn’t it be launched di­ag­o­nally against those tracts of ice, which would break open from the im­pact?”</p>
				<p>“Ah, pro­fes­sor, you’re full of ideas to­day!”</p>
				<p>“Be­sides, cap­tain,” I added with still greater en­thu­si­asm, “why wouldn’t we find open sea at the South Pole just as at the North Pole? The cold-tem­per­a­ture poles and the ge­o­graph­i­cal poles don’t co­in­cide in ei­ther the north­ern or south­ern hemi­spheres, and un­til proof to the con­trary, we can as­sume these two spots on the earth fea­ture ei­ther a con­ti­nent or an ice-free ocean.”</p>
				<p>“I think as you do, Pro­fes­sor Aron­nax,” Cap­tain Nemo replied. “I’ll only point out that af­ter rais­ing so many ob­jec­tions against my plan, you’re now crush­ing me un­der ar­gu­ments in its fa­vor.”</p>
				<p>Cap­tain Nemo was right. I was out­do­ing him in dar­ing! It was I who was sweep­ing him to the pole. I was lead­ing the way, I was out in front … but no, you silly fool! Cap­tain Nemo al­ready knew the pros and cons of this ques­tion, and it amused him to see you fly­ing off into im­pos­si­ble fan­tasies!</p>
				<p>Nev­er­the­less, he didn’t waste an in­stant. At his sig­nal, the chief of­fi­cer ap­peared. The two men held a quick ex­change in their in­com­pre­hen­si­ble lan­guage, and ei­ther the chief of­fi­cer had been alerted pre­vi­ously or he found the plan fea­si­ble, be­cause he showed no sur­prise.</p>
				<p>But as un­emo­tional as he was, he couldn’t have been more im­pec­ca­bly emo­tion­less than Con­seil when I told the fine lad our in­ten­tion of push­ing on to the South Pole. He greeted my an­nounce­ment with the usual “As mas­ter wishes,” and I had to be con­tent with that. As for Ned Land, no hu­man shoul­ders ever ex­e­cuted a higher shrug than the pair be­long­ing to our Cana­dian.</p>
				<p>“Hon­estly, sir,” he told me. “You and your Cap­tain Nemo, I pity you both!”</p>
				<p>“But we will go to the pole, Mr. Land.”</p>
				<p>“Maybe, but you won’t come back!”</p>
				<p>And Ned Land reen­tered his cabin, “to keep from do­ing some­thing des­per­ate,” he said as he left me.</p>
				<p>Mean­while prepa­ra­tions for this dar­ing at­tempt were get­ting un­der way. The <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i>’s pow­er­ful pumps forced air down into the tanks and stored it un­der high pres­sure. Near four o’clock Cap­tain Nemo in­formed me that the plat­form hatches were about to be closed. I took a last look at the dense Ice Bank we were go­ing to con­quer. The weather was fair, the skies rea­son­ably clear, the cold quite brisk, namely −12° centi­grade; but af­ter the wind had lulled, this tem­per­a­ture didn’t seem too un­bear­able.</p>
				<p>Equipped with picks, some ten men climbed onto the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i>’s sides and cracked loose the ice around the ship’s lower plat­ing, which was soon set free. This op­er­a­tion was swiftly ex­e­cuted be­cause the fresh ice was still thin. We all reen­tered the in­te­rior. The main bal­last tanks were filled with the wa­ter that hadn’t yet con­gealed at our line of flota­tion. The <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i> sub­merged with­out de­lay.</p>
				<p>I took a seat in the lounge with Con­seil. Through the open win­dow we stared at the lower strata of this south­ern­most ocean. The ther­mome­ter rose again. The nee­dle on the pres­sure gauge swerved over its dial.</p>
				<p>About 300 me­ters down, just as Cap­tain Nemo had pre­dicted, we cruised be­neath the un­du­lat­ing sur­face of the Ice Bank. But the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i> sank deeper still. It reached a depth of 800 me­ters. At the sur­face this wa­ter gave a tem­per­a­ture of −12° centi­grade, but now it gave no more than −10°. Two de­grees had al­ready been gained. Thanks to its heat­ing equip­ment, the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i>’s tem­per­a­ture, need­less to say, stayed at a much higher de­gree. Every ma­neu­ver was ac­com­plished with ex­tra­or­di­nary pre­ci­sion.</p>
				<p>“With all due re­spect to mas­ter,” Con­seil told me, “we’ll pass it by.”</p>
				<p>“I fully ex­pect to!” I replied in a tone of deep con­vic­tion.</p>
				<p>Now in open wa­ter, the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i> took a di­rect course to the pole with­out veer­ing from the 52nd merid­ian. From 67° 30′ to 90°, twenty-two and a half de­grees of lat­i­tude were left to cross, in other words, slightly more than 500 leagues. The <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i> adopted an av­er­age speed of twenty-six miles per hour, the speed of an ex­press train. If it kept up this pace, forty hours would do it for reach­ing the pole.</p>
				<p>For part of the night, the nov­elty of our cir­cum­stances kept Con­seil and me at the lounge win­dow. The sea was lit by our bea­con’s elec­tric rays. But the depths were de­serted. Fish didn’t linger in these im­pris­oned wa­ters. Here they found merely a pas­sage­way for go­ing from the Antarc­tic Ocean to open sea at the pole. Our progress was swift. You could feel it in the vi­bra­tions of the long steel hull.</p>
				<p>Near two o’clock in the morn­ing, I went to snatch a few hours of sleep. Con­seil did like­wise. I didn’t en­counter Cap­tain Nemo while go­ing down the gang­ways. I as­sumed that he was keep­ing to the pi­lot­house.</p>
				<p>The next day, March 19, at five o’clock in the morn­ing, I was back at my post in the lounge. The elec­tric log in­di­cated that the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i> had re­duced speed. By then it was ris­ing to the sur­face, but cau­tiously, while slowly emp­ty­ing its bal­last tanks.</p>
				<p>My heart was pound­ing. Would we emerge into the open and find the po­lar air again?</p>
				<p>No. A jolt told me that the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i> had bumped the un­der­belly of the Ice Bank, still quite thick to judge from the hol­low­ness of the ac­com­pa­ny­ing noise. In­deed, we had “struck bot­tom,” to use nau­ti­cal ter­mi­nol­ogy, but in the op­po­site di­rec­tion and at a depth of 3,000 feet. That gave us 4,000 feet of ice over­head, of which 1,000 feet emerged above wa­ter. So the Ice Bank was higher here than we had found it on the out­skirts. A cir­cum­stance less than en­cour­ag­ing.</p>
				<p>Sev­eral times that day, the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i> re­peated the same ex­per­i­ment and al­ways it bumped against this sur­face that formed a ceil­ing above it. At cer­tain mo­ments the ship en­coun­tered ice at a depth of 900 me­ters, de­not­ing a thick­ness of 1,200 me­ters, of which 300 me­ters rose above the level of the ocean. This height had tripled since the mo­ment the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i> had dived be­neath the waves.</p>
				<p>I metic­u­lously noted these dif­fer­ent depths, ob­tain­ing the un­der­wa­ter pro­file of this up­side-down moun­tain chain that stretched be­neath the sea.</p>
				<p>By evening there was still no im­prove­ment in our sit­u­a­tion. The ice stayed be­tween 400 and 500 me­ters deep. It was ob­vi­ously shrink­ing, but what a bar­rier still lay be­tween us and the sur­face of the ocean!</p>
				<p>By then it was eight o’clock. The air in­side the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i> should have been re­newed four hours ear­lier, fol­low­ing daily prac­tice on board. But I didn’t suf­fer very much, al­though Cap­tain Nemo hadn’t yet made de­mands on the sup­ple­men­tary oxy­gen in his air tanks.</p>
				<p>That night my sleep was fit­ful. Hope and fear be­sieged me by turns. I got up sev­eral times. The <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i> con­tin­ued grop­ing. Near three o’clock in the morn­ing, I ob­served that we en­coun­tered the Ice Bank’s un­der­belly at a depth of only fifty me­ters. So only 150 feet sep­a­rated us from the sur­face of the wa­ter. Lit­tle by lit­tle the Ice Bank was turn­ing into an ice field again. The moun­tains were chang­ing back into plains.</p>
				<p>My eyes didn’t leave the pres­sure gauge. We kept ris­ing on a di­ag­o­nal, go­ing along this shiny sur­face that sparkled be­neath our elec­tric rays. Above and be­low, the Ice Bank was sub­sid­ing in long gra­di­ents. Mile af­ter mile it was grow­ing thin­ner.</p>
				<p>Fi­nally, at six o’clock in the morn­ing on that mem­o­rable day of March 19, the lounge door opened. Cap­tain Nemo ap­peared.</p>
				<p>“Open sea!” he told me.</p>
			</section>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
