<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="en-US" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: http://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Chapter 18</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="part-2" epub:type="part">
			<section id="chapter-2-18" epub:type="chapter">
				<h3 epub:type="title">
					<span class="first-child" epub:type="z3998:roman">XVIII</span>
					<span class="epub-type-subtitle" epub:type="subtitle">The Devilfish</span>
				</h3>
				<p>For some days the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i> kept veer­ing away from the Amer­i­can coast. It ob­vi­ously didn’t want to fre­quent the waves of the Gulf of Mex­ico or the Caribbean Sea. Yet there was no short­age of wa­ter un­der its keel, since the av­er­age depth of these seas is 1,800 me­ters; but these wa­ter­ways, strewn with is­lands and plowed by steam­ers, prob­a­bly didn’t agree with Cap­tain Nemo.</p>
				<p>On April 16 we raised Mar­tinique and Guadalupe from a dis­tance of about thirty miles. For one in­stant I could see their lofty peaks.</p>
				<p>The Cana­dian was quite dis­heart­ened, hav­ing counted on putting his plans into ex­e­cu­tion in the gulf, ei­ther by reach­ing shore or by pulling along­side one of the many boats ply­ing a coastal trade from one is­land to an­other. An es­cape at­tempt would have been quite fea­si­ble, as­sum­ing Ned Land man­aged to seize the skiff with­out the cap­tain’s knowl­edge. But in mi­do­cean it was un­think­able.</p>
				<p>The Cana­dian, Con­seil, and I had a pretty long con­ver­sa­tion on this sub­ject. For six months we had been pris­on­ers aboard the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i>. We had fared 17,000 leagues, and as Ned Land put it, there was no end in sight. So he made me a propo­si­tion I hadn’t an­tic­i­pated. We were to ask Cap­tain Nemo this ques­tion straight out: did the cap­tain mean to keep us on board his ves­sel per­ma­nently?</p>
				<p>This mea­sure was dis­taste­ful to me. To my mind it would lead nowhere. We could hope for noth­ing from the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i>’s com­man­der but could de­pend only on our­selves. Be­sides, for some time now the man had been gloomier, more with­drawn, less so­cia­ble. He seemed to be avoid­ing me. I en­coun­tered him only at rare in­ter­vals. He used to take plea­sure in ex­plain­ing the un­der­wa­ter won­ders to me; now he left me to my re­search and no longer en­tered the lounge.</p>
				<p>What changes had come over him? From what cause? I had no rea­son to blame my­self. Was our pres­ence on board per­haps a bur­den to him? Even so, I cher­ished no hopes that the man would set us free.</p>
				<p>So I begged Ned to let me think about it be­fore tak­ing ac­tion. If this mea­sure proved fruit­less, it could arouse the cap­tain’s sus­pi­cions, make our cir­cum­stances even more ar­du­ous, and jeop­ar­dize the Cana­dian’s plans. I might add that I could hardly use our state of health as an ar­gu­ment. Ex­cept for that gru­el­ing or­deal un­der the Ice Bank at the South Pole, we had never felt bet­ter, nei­ther Ned, Con­seil, nor I. The nu­tri­tious food, life-giv­ing air, reg­u­lar rou­tine, and uni­form tem­per­a­ture kept ill­ness at bay; and for a man who didn’t miss his past ex­is­tence on land, for a Cap­tain Nemo who was at home here, who went where he wished, who took paths mys­te­ri­ous to oth­ers if not him­self in at­tain­ing his ends, I could un­der­stand such a life. But we our­selves hadn’t sev­ered all ties with hu­man­ity. For my part, I didn’t want my new and un­usual re­search to be buried with my bones. I had now earned the right to pen the de­fin­i­tive book on the sea, and sooner or later I wanted that book to see the light of day.</p>
				<p>There once more, through the pan­els open­ing into these Caribbean wa­ters ten me­ters be­low the sur­face of the waves, I found so many fas­ci­nat­ing ex­hibits to de­scribe in my daily notes! Among other zoophytes there were Por­tuguese men-of-war known by the name <i epub:type="z3998:taxonomy">Physalia pelag­ica</i>, like big, ob­long blad­ders with a pearly sheen, spread­ing their mem­branes to the wind, let­ting their blue ten­ta­cles drift like silken threads; to the eye de­light­ful jel­ly­fish, to the touch ac­tual net­tles that ooze a cor­ro­sive liq­uid. Among the ar­tic­u­lates there were an­nelid worms one and a half me­ters long, fur­nished with a pink pro­boscis, equipped with 1,700 or­gans of lo­co­mo­tion, snaking through the wa­ters, and as they went, throw­ing off ev­ery gleam in the so­lar spec­trum. From the fish branch there were manta rays, enor­mous car­ti­lagi­nous fish ten feet long and weigh­ing 600 pounds, their pec­toral fin tri­an­gu­lar, their mid­back slightly arched, their eyes at­tached to the edges of the face at the front of the head; they floated like wreck­age from a ship, some­times fas­ten­ing onto our win­dows like opaque shut­ters. There were Amer­i­can trig­ger­fish for which na­ture has ground only black and white pig­ments, feather-shaped go­b­ies that were long and plump with yel­low fins and jut­ting jaws, six­teen-decime­ter mack­erel with short, sharp teeth, cov­ered with small scales, and re­lated to the al­ba­core species. Next came swarms of red mul­let corseted in gold stripes from head to tail, their shin­ing fins all aquiver, gen­uine mas­ter­pieces of jew­elry, for­merly sa­cred to the god­dess Diana, much in de­mand by rich Ro­mans, and about which the old say­ing goes: “He who catches them doesn’t eat them!” Fi­nally, adorned with emer­ald rib­bons and dressed in vel­vet and silk, golden an­gelfish passed be­fore our eyes like courtiers in the paint­ings of Veronese; spurred gilt­head stole by with their swift tho­racic fins; thread her­ring fif­teen inches long were wrapped in their phos­pho­res­cent glim­mers; gray mul­let thrashed the sea with their big fleshy tails; red salmon seemed to mow the waves with their slic­ing pec­torals; and sil­ver moon­fish, wor­thy of their name, rose on the hori­zon of the wa­ters like the whitish re­flec­tions of many moons.</p>
				<p>How many other mar­velous new spec­i­mens I still could have ob­served if, lit­tle by lit­tle, the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i> hadn’t set­tled to the lower strata! Its slant­ing fins drew it to depths of 2,000 and 3,500 me­ters. There an­i­mal life was rep­re­sented by noth­ing more than sea lilies, starfish, de­light­ful crinoids with bell-shaped heads like lit­tle chal­ices on straight stems, top-shell snails, blood-red tooth shells, and fis­surella snails, a large species of coastal mol­lusk.</p>
				<p>By April 20 we had risen to an av­er­age level of 1,500 me­ters. The near­est land was the is­land group of the Ba­hamas, scat­tered like a batch of cob­ble­stones over the sur­face of the wa­ter. There high un­der­wa­ter cliffs reared up, straight walls made of craggy chunks ar­ranged like big stone foun­da­tions, among which there gaped black caves so deep our elec­tric rays couldn’t light them to the far ends.</p>
				<p>Th­ese rocks were hung with huge weeds, im­mense sea tan­gle, gi­gan­tic fu­cus—a gen­uine trel­lis of wa­ter plants fit for a world of gi­ants.</p>
				<p>In dis­cussing these colos­sal plants, Con­seil, Ned, and I were nat­u­rally led into men­tion­ing the sea’s gi­gan­tic an­i­mals. The for­mer were ob­vi­ously meant to feed the lat­ter. How­ever, through the win­dows of our al­most mo­tion­less <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i>, I could see noth­ing among these long fil­a­ments other than the chief ar­tic­u­lates of the di­vi­sion <i epub:type="z3998:taxonomy">Brachyura</i>: long-legged spi­der crabs, vi­o­let crabs, and sponge crabs unique to the wa­ters of the Caribbean.</p>
				<p>It was about eleven o’clock when Ned Land drew my at­ten­tion to a fear­some com­mo­tion out in this huge sea­weed.</p>
				<p>“Well,” I said, “these are real dev­il­fish cav­erns, and I wouldn’t be sur­prised to see some of those mon­sters here­abouts.”</p>
				<p>“What!” Con­seil put in. “Squid, or­di­nary squid from the class <i epub:type="z3998:taxonomy">Cephalopoda</i>?”</p>
				<p>“No,” I said, “dev­il­fish of large di­men­sions. But friend Land is no doubt mis­taken, be­cause I don’t see a thing.”</p>
				<p>“That’s re­gret­table,” Con­seil an­swered. “I’d like to come face to face with one of those dev­il­fish I’ve heard so much about, which can drag ships down into the depths. Those beasts go by the name of <i>krake</i>—”</p>
				<p>“Fake is more like it,” the Cana­dian replied sar­cas­ti­cally.</p>
				<p>“Krak­ens!” Con­seil shot back, fin­ish­ing his word with­out winc­ing at his com­pan­ion’s wit­ti­cism.</p>
				<p>“No­body will ever make me be­lieve,” Ned Land said, “that such an­i­mals ex­ist.”</p>
				<p>“Why not?” Con­seil replied. “We sin­cerely be­lieved in mas­ter’s nar­whale.”</p>
				<p>“We were wrong, Con­seil.”</p>
				<p>“No doubt, but there are oth­ers with no doubts who be­lieve to this day!”</p>
				<p>“Prob­a­bly, Con­seil. But as for me, I’m bound and de­ter­mined not to ac­cept the ex­is­tence of any such mon­ster till I’ve dis­sected it with my own two hands.”</p>
				<p>“Yet,” Con­seil asked me, “doesn’t mas­ter be­lieve in gi­gan­tic dev­il­fish?”</p>
				<p>“Yikes! Who in Hades ever be­lieved in them?” the Cana­dian ex­claimed.</p>
				<p>“Many peo­ple, Ned my friend,” I said.</p>
				<p>“No fish­er­men. Sci­en­tists maybe!”</p>
				<p>“Par­don me, Ned. Fish­er­men and sci­en­tists!”</p>
				<p>“Why, I to whom you speak,” Con­seil said with the world’s straight­est face, “I re­call per­fectly see­ing a large boat dragged un­der the waves by the arms of a cephalo­pod.”</p>
				<p>“You saw that?” the Cana­dian asked.</p>
				<p>“Yes, Ned.”</p>
				<p>“With your own two eyes?”</p>
				<p>“With my own two eyes.”</p>
				<p>“Where, may I ask?”</p>
				<p>“In Saint-Malo,” Con­seil re­turned un­flap­pably.</p>
				<p>“In the har­bor?” Ned Land said sar­cas­ti­cally.</p>
				<p>“No, in a church,” Con­seil replied.</p>
				<p>“In a church!” the Cana­dian ex­claimed.</p>
				<p>“Yes, Ned my friend. It had a pic­ture that por­trayed the dev­il­fish in ques­tion.”</p>
				<p>“Oh good!” Ned Land ex­claimed with a burst of laugh­ter. “Mr. Con­seil put one over on me!”</p>
				<p>“Ac­tu­ally he’s right,” I said. “I’ve heard about that pic­ture. But the sub­ject it por­trays is taken from a leg­end, and you know how to rate leg­ends in mat­ters of nat­u­ral his­tory! Be­sides, when it’s an is­sue of mon­sters, the hu­man imag­i­na­tion al­ways tends to run wild. Peo­ple not only claimed these dev­il­fish could drag ships un­der, but a cer­tain Olaus Mag­nus tells of a cephalo­pod a mile long that looked more like an is­land than an an­i­mal. There’s also the story of how the Bishop of Trond­heim set up an al­tar one day on an im­mense rock. After he fin­ished say­ing mass, this rock started mov­ing and went back into the sea. The rock was a dev­il­fish.”</p>
				<p>“And that’s ev­ery­thing we know?” the Cana­dian asked.</p>
				<p>“No,” I replied, “an­other bishop, Pon­top­p­i­dan of Ber­gen, also tells of a dev­il­fish so large a whole cav­alry reg­i­ment could ma­neu­ver on it.”</p>
				<p>“They sure did go on, those old-time bish­ops!” Ned Land said.</p>
				<p>“Fi­nally, the nat­u­ral­ists of an­tiq­uity men­tion some mon­sters with mouths as big as a gulf, which were too huge to get through the Strait of Gi­bral­tar.”</p>
				<p>“Good work, men!” the Cana­dian put in.</p>
				<p>“But in all these sto­ries, is there any truth?” Con­seil asked.</p>
				<p>“None at all, my friends, at least in those that go be­yond the bounds of cred­i­bil­ity and fly off into fa­ble or leg­end. Yet for the imag­in­ings of these sto­ry­tellers there had to be, if not a cause, at least an ex­cuse. It can’t be de­nied that some species of squid and other dev­il­fish are quite large, though still smaller than cetaceans. Aris­to­tle put the di­men­sions of one squid at five cu­bits, or 3.1 me­ters. Our fish­er­men fre­quently see spec­i­mens over 1.8 me­ters long. The mu­se­ums in Tri­este and Mont­pel­lier have pre­served some dev­il­fish car­casses mea­sur­ing two me­ters. Be­sides, ac­cord­ing to the cal­cu­la­tions of nat­u­ral­ists, one of these an­i­mals only six feet long would have ten­ta­cles as long as twenty-seven. Which is enough to make a fear­some mon­ster.”</p>
				<p>“Does any­body fish for ’em nowa­days?” the Cana­dian asked.</p>
				<p>“If they don’t fish for them, sailors at least sight them. A friend of mine, Cap­tain Paul Bos of Le Havre, has of­ten sworn to me that he en­coun­tered one of these mon­sters of colos­sal size in the seas of the East Indies. But the most as­ton­ish­ing event, which proves that these gi­gan­tic an­i­mals un­de­ni­ably ex­ist, took place a few years ago in 1861.”</p>
				<p>“What event was that?” Ned Land asked.</p>
				<p>“Just this. In 1861, to the north­east of Tener­ife and fairly near the lat­i­tude where we are right now, the crew of the gun­boat <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Alecto</i> spot­ted a mon­strous squid swim­ming in their wa­ters. Com­man­der Bouguer ap­proached the an­i­mal and at­tacked it with blows from har­poons and blasts from ri­fles, but with­out much suc­cess be­cause bul­lets and har­poons crossed its soft flesh as if it were semiliq­uid jelly. After sev­eral fruit­less at­tempts, the crew man­aged to slip a noose around the mol­lusk’s body. This noose slid as far as the cau­dal fins and came to a halt. Then they tried to haul the mon­ster on board, but its weight was so con­sid­er­able that when they tugged on the rope, the an­i­mal parted com­pany with its tail; and de­prived of this adorn­ment, it dis­ap­peared be­neath the wa­ters.”</p>
				<p>“Fi­nally, an ac­tual event,” Ned Land said.</p>
				<p>“An in­dis­putable event, my gal­lant Ned. Ac­cord­ingly, peo­ple have pro­posed nam­ing this dev­il­fish Bouguer’s Squid.”</p>
				<p>“And how long was it?” the Cana­dian asked.</p>
				<p>“Didn’t it mea­sure about six me­ters?” said Con­seil, who was sta­tioned at the win­dow and ex­am­in­ing anew the crevices in the cliff.</p>
				<p>“Pre­cisely,” I replied.</p>
				<p>“Wasn’t its head,” Con­seil went on, “crowned by eight ten­ta­cles that quiv­ered in the wa­ter like a nest of snakes?”</p>
				<p>“Pre­cisely.”</p>
				<p>“Weren’t its eyes promi­nently placed and con­sid­er­ably en­larged?”</p>
				<p>“Yes, Con­seil.”</p>
				<p>“And wasn’t its mouth a real par­rot’s beak but of fear­some size?”</p>
				<p>“Cor­rect, Con­seil.”</p>
				<p>“Well, with all due re­spect to mas­ter,” Con­seil replied serenely, “if this isn’t Bouguer’s Squid, it’s at least one of his close rel­a­tives!”</p>
				<p>I stared at Con­seil. Ned Land rushed to the win­dow.</p>
				<p>“What an aw­ful an­i­mal!” he ex­claimed.</p>
				<p>I stared in my turn and couldn’t keep back a move­ment of re­vul­sion. Be­fore my eyes there quiv­ered a hor­ri­ble mon­ster wor­thy of a place among the most far­fetched ter­a­to­log­i­cal leg­ends.</p>
				<p>It was a squid of colos­sal di­men­sions, fully eight me­ters long. It was trav­el­ing back­ward with tremen­dous speed in the same di­rec­tion as the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i>. It gazed with enor­mous, star­ing eyes that were tinted sea green. Its eight arms (or more ac­cu­rately, feet) were rooted in its head, which has earned these an­i­mals the name cephalo­pod; its arms stretched a dis­tance twice the length of its body and were writhing like the ser­pen­tine hair of the Furies. You could plainly see its 250 suck­ers, ar­ranged over the in­ner sides of its ten­ta­cles and shaped like semi­spheric cap­sules. Some­times these suck­ers fas­tened onto the lounge win­dow by cre­at­ing vac­u­ums against it. The mon­ster’s mouth—a beak made of horn and shaped like that of a par­rot—opened and closed ver­ti­cally. Its tongue, also of horn sub­stance and armed with sev­eral rows of sharp teeth, would flicker out from be­tween these gen­uine shears. What a freak of na­ture! A bird’s beak on a mol­lusk! Its body was spin­dle-shaped and swollen in the mid­dle, a fleshy mass that must have weighed 20,000 to 25,000 kilo­grams. Its un­sta­ble color would change with tremen­dous speed as the an­i­mal grew ir­ri­tated, pass­ing suc­ces­sively from bluish gray to red­dish brown.</p>
				<p>What was ir­ri­tat­ing this mol­lusk? No doubt the pres­ence of the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i>, even more fear­some than it­self, and which it couldn’t grip with its mandibles or the suck­ers on its arms. And yet what mon­sters these dev­il­fish are, what vi­tal­ity our Creator has given them, what vigor in their move­ments, thanks to their own­ing a triple heart!</p>
				<p>Sheer chance had placed us in the pres­ence of this squid, and I didn’t want to lose this op­por­tu­nity to metic­u­lously study such a cephalo­pod spec­i­men. I over­came the hor­ror that its ap­pear­ance in­spired in me, picked up a pen­cil, and be­gan to sketch it.</p>
				<p>“Per­haps this is the same as the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Alecto</i>’s,” Con­seil said.</p>
				<p>“Can’t be,” the Cana­dian replied, “be­cause this one’s com­plete while the other one lost its tail!”</p>
				<p>“That doesn’t nec­es­sar­ily fol­low,” I said. “The arms and tails of these an­i­mals grow back through re­gen­er­a­tion, and in seven years the tail on Bouguer’s Squid has surely had time to sprout again.”</p>
				<p>“Any­how,” Ned shot back, “if it isn’t this fel­low, maybe it’s one of those!”</p>
				<p>In­deed, other dev­il­fish had ap­peared at the star­board win­dow. I counted seven of them. They pro­vided the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i> with an es­cort, and I could hear their beaks gnash­ing on the sheet-iron hull. We couldn’t have asked for a more de­voted fol­low­ing.</p>
				<p>I con­tin­ued sketch­ing. Th­ese mon­sters kept pace in our wa­ters with such pre­ci­sion, they seemed to be stand­ing still, and I could have traced their out­lines in minia­ture on the win­dow. But we were mov­ing at a mod­er­ate speed.</p>
				<p>All at once the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i> stopped. A jolt made it trem­ble through its en­tire frame­work.</p>
				<p>“Did we strike bot­tom?” I asked.</p>
				<p>“In any event we’re al­ready clear,” the Cana­dian replied, “be­cause we’re afloat.”</p>
				<p>The <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i> was cer­tainly afloat, but it was no longer in mo­tion. The blades of its pro­pel­ler weren’t churn­ing the waves. A minute passed. Fol­lowed by his chief of­fi­cer, Cap­tain Nemo en­tered the lounge.</p>
				<p>I hadn’t seen him for a good while. He looked gloomy to me. Without speak­ing to us, with­out even see­ing us per­haps, he went to the panel, stared at the dev­il­fish, and said a few words to his chief of­fi­cer.</p>
				<p>The lat­ter went out. Soon the pan­els closed. The ceil­ing lit up.</p>
				<p>I went over to the cap­tain.</p>
				<p>“An un­usual as­sort­ment of dev­il­fish,” I told him, as care­free as a col­lec­tor in front of an aquar­ium.</p>
				<p>“Cor­rect, Mr. Nat­u­ral­ist,” he an­swered me, “and we’re go­ing to fight them at close quar­ters.”</p>
				<p>I gaped at the cap­tain. I thought my hear­ing had gone bad.</p>
				<p>“At close quar­ters?” I re­peated.</p>
				<p>“Yes, sir. Our pro­pel­ler is jammed. I think the horn-cov­ered mandibles of one of these squid are en­tan­gled in the blades. That’s why we aren’t mov­ing.”</p>
				<p>“And what are you go­ing to do?”</p>
				<p>“Rise to the sur­face and slaugh­ter the ver­min.”</p>
				<p>“A dif­fi­cult un­der­tak­ing.”</p>
				<p>“Cor­rect. Our elec­tric bul­lets are in­ef­fec­tive against such soft flesh, where they don’t meet enough re­sis­tance to go off. But we’ll at­tack the beasts with axes.”</p>
				<p>“And har­poons, sir,” the Cana­dian said, “if you don’t turn down my help.”</p>
				<p>“I ac­cept it, Mr. Land.”</p>
				<p>“We’ll go with you,” I said. And we fol­lowed Cap­tain Nemo, head­ing to the cen­tral com­pan­ion­way.</p>
				<p>There some ten men were stand­ing by for the as­sault, armed with board­ing axes. Con­seil and I picked up two more axes. Ned Land seized a har­poon.</p>
				<p>By then the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i> had re­turned to the sur­face of the waves. Sta­tioned on the top steps, one of the sea­men un­did the bolts of the hatch. But he had scarcely un­screwed the nuts when the hatch flew up with tremen­dous vi­o­lence, ob­vi­ously pulled open by the suck­ers on a dev­il­fish’s arm.</p>
				<p>In­stantly one of those long arms glided like a snake into the open­ing, and twenty oth­ers were quiv­er­ing above. With a sweep of the ax, Cap­tain Nemo chopped off this fear­some ten­ta­cle, which slid writhing down the steps.</p>
				<p>Just as we were crowd­ing each other to reach the plat­form, two more arms lashed the air, swooped on the sea­man sta­tioned in front of Cap­tain Nemo, and car­ried the fel­low away with ir­re­sistible vi­o­lence.</p>
				<p>Cap­tain Nemo gave a shout and leaped out­side. We rushed af­ter him.</p>
				<p>What a scene! Seized by the ten­ta­cle and glued to its suck­ers, the un­for­tu­nate man was swing­ing in the air at the mercy of this enor­mous ap­pendage. He gasped, he choked, he yelled: “Help! Help!” Th­ese words, pro­nounced in French, left me deeply stunned! So I had a fel­low coun­try­man on board, per­haps sev­eral! I’ll hear his har­row­ing plea the rest of my life!</p>
				<p>The poor fel­low was done for. Who could tear him from such a pow­er­ful grip? Even so, Cap­tain Nemo rushed at the dev­il­fish and with a sweep of the ax hewed one more of its arms. His chief of­fi­cer strug­gled fu­ri­ously with other mon­sters crawl­ing up the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i>’s sides. The crew bat­tled with flail­ing axes. The Cana­dian, Con­seil, and I sank our weapons into these fleshy masses. An in­tense, musky odor filled the air. It was hor­ri­ble.</p>
				<p>For an in­stant I thought the poor man en­twined by the dev­il­fish might be torn loose from its pow­er­ful suc­tion. Seven arms out of eight had been chopped off. Bran­dish­ing its vic­tim like a feather, one lone ten­ta­cle was writhing in the air. But just as Cap­tain Nemo and his chief of­fi­cer rushed at it, the an­i­mal shot off a spout of black­ish liq­uid, se­creted by a pouch lo­cated in its ab­domen. It blinded us. When this cloud had dis­persed, the squid was gone, and so was my poor fel­low coun­try­man!</p>
				<p>What rage then drove us against these mon­sters! We lost all self-con­trol. Ten or twelve dev­il­fish had over­run the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i>’s plat­form and sides. We piled hel­ter-skel­ter into the thick of these sawed-off snakes, which darted over the plat­form amid waves of blood and sepia ink. It seemed as if these vis­cous ten­ta­cles grew back like the many heads of Hy­dra. At ev­ery thrust Ned Land’s har­poon would plunge into a squid’s sea-green eye and burst it. But my dar­ing com­pan­ion was sud­denly top­pled by the ten­ta­cles of a mon­ster he could not avoid.</p>
				<p>Oh, my heart nearly ex­ploded with ex­cite­ment and hor­ror! The squid’s fear­some beak was wide open over Ned Land. The poor man was about to be cut in half. I ran to his res­cue. But Cap­tain Nemo got there first. His ax dis­ap­peared be­tween the two enor­mous mandibles, and the Cana­dian, mirac­u­lously saved, stood and plunged his har­poon all the way into the dev­il­fish’s triple heart.</p>
				<p>“Tit for tat,” Cap­tain Nemo told the Cana­dian. “I owed it to my­self!”</p>
				<p>Ned bowed with­out an­swer­ing him.</p>
				<p>This strug­gle had lasted a quar­ter of an hour. De­feated, mu­ti­lated, bat­tered to death, the mon­sters fi­nally yielded to us and dis­ap­peared be­neath the waves.</p>
				<p>Red with blood, mo­tion­less by the bea­con, Cap­tain Nemo stared at the sea that had swal­lowed one of his com­pan­ions, and large tears streamed from his eyes.</p>
			</section>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
