<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="en-US" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: http://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Chapter 16</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="part-1" epub:type="part">
			<section id="chapter-1-16" epub:type="chapter">
				<h3 epub:type="title">
					<span class="first-child" epub:type="z3998:roman">XVI</span>
					<span class="epub-type-subtitle" epub:type="subtitle">Strolling the Plains</span>
				</h3>
				<p>This cell, prop­erly speak­ing, was the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i>’s ar­se­nal and wardrobe. Hang­ing from its walls, a dozen div­ing out­fits were wait­ing for any­body who wanted to take a stroll.</p>
				<p>After see­ing these, Ned Land ex­hib­ited an ob­vi­ous dis­taste for the idea of putting one on.</p>
				<p>“But my gal­lant Ned,” I told him, “the forests of Cre­spo Is­land are sim­ply un­der­wa­ter forests!”</p>
				<p>“Oh great!” put in the dis­ap­pointed har­pooner, watch­ing his dreams of fresh meat fade away. “And you, Pro­fes­sor Aron­nax, are you go­ing to stick your­self in­side these clothes?”</p>
				<p>“It has to be, Mr. Ned.”</p>
				<p>“Have it your way, sir,” the har­pooner replied, shrug­ging his shoul­ders. “But speak­ing for my­self, I’ll never get into those things un­less they force me!”</p>
				<p>“No one will force you, Mr. Land,” Cap­tain Nemo said.</p>
				<p>“And is Con­seil go­ing to risk it?” Ned asked.</p>
				<p>“Where mas­ter goes, I go,” Con­seil replied.</p>
				<p>At the cap­tain’s sum­mons, two crew­men came to help us put on these heavy, wa­ter­proof clothes, made from seam­less in­dia rub­ber and ex­pressly de­signed to bear con­sid­er­able pres­sures. They were like suits of ar­mor that were both yield­ing and re­sis­tant, you might say. Th­ese clothes con­sisted of jacket and pants. The pants ended in bulky footwear adorned with heavy lead soles. The fab­ric of the jacket was re­in­forced with cop­per mail that shielded the chest, pro­tected it from the wa­ter’s pres­sure, and al­lowed the lungs to func­tion freely; the sleeves ended in sup­ple gloves that didn’t im­pede hand move­ments.</p>
				<p>Th­ese per­fected div­ing suits, it was easy to see, were a far cry from such mis­shapen cos­tumes as the cork breast­plates, leather jumpers, seago­ing tu­nics, bar­rel hel­mets, etc., in­vented and ac­claimed in the 18th cen­tury.</p>
				<p>Con­seil and I were soon dressed in these div­ing suits, as were Cap­tain Nemo and one of his com­pan­ions—a her­culean type who must have been prodi­giously strong. All that re­mained was to en­case one’s head in its metal sphere. But be­fore pro­ceed­ing with this op­er­a­tion, I asked the cap­tain for per­mis­sion to ex­am­ine the ri­fles set aside for us.</p>
				<p>One of the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i>’s men pre­sented me with a stream­lined ri­fle whose butt was boil­er­plate steel, hol­low in­side, and of fairly large di­men­sions. This served as a tank for the com­pressed air, which a trig­ger-op­er­ated valve could re­lease into the metal cham­ber. In a groove where the butt was heav­i­est, a car­tridge clip held some twenty elec­tric bul­lets that, by means of a spring, au­to­mat­i­cally took their places in the bar­rel of the ri­fle. As soon as one shot had been fired, an­other was ready to go off.</p>
				<p>“Cap­tain Nemo,” I said, “this is an ideal, easy-to-use weapon. I ask only to put it to the test. But how will we reach the bot­tom of the sea?”</p>
				<p>“Right now, pro­fes­sor, the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i> is aground in ten me­ters of wa­ter, and we’ve only to de­part.”</p>
				<p>“But how will we set out?”</p>
				<p>“You’ll see.”</p>
				<p>Cap­tain Nemo in­serted his cra­nium into its spher­i­cal head­gear. Con­seil and I did the same, but not with­out hear­ing the Cana­dian toss us a sar­cas­tic “happy hunt­ing.” On top, the suit ended in a col­lar of threaded cop­per onto which the metal hel­met was screwed. Three holes, pro­tected by heavy glass, al­lowed us to see in any di­rec­tion with sim­ply a turn of the head in­side the sphere. Placed on our backs, the Rouquay­rol de­vice went into op­er­a­tion as soon as it was in po­si­tion, and for my part, I could breathe with ease.</p>
				<p>The Ruhmko­rff lamp hang­ing from my belt, my ri­fle in hand, I was ready to go forth. But in all hon­esty, while im­pris­oned in these heavy clothes and nailed to the deck by my lead soles, it was im­pos­si­ble for me to take a sin­gle step.</p>
				<p>But this cir­cum­stance had been fore­seen, be­cause I felt my­self pro­pelled into a lit­tle room ad­join­ing the wardrobe. Towed in the same way, my com­pan­ions went with me. I heard a door with wa­ter­tight seals close af­ter us, and we were sur­rounded by pro­found dark­ness.</p>
				<p>After some min­utes a sharp hiss­ing reached my ears. I felt a dis­tinct sen­sa­tion of cold ris­ing from my feet to my chest. Ap­par­ently a stop­cock in­side the boat was let­ting in wa­ter from out­side, which over­ran us and soon filled up the room. Con­trived in the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i>’s side, a sec­ond door then opened. We were lit by a sub­dued light. An in­stant later our feet were tread­ing the bot­tom of the sea.</p>
				<p>And now, how can I con­vey the im­pres­sions left on me by this stroll un­der the wa­ters. Words are pow­er­less to de­scribe such won­ders! When even the painter’s brush can’t de­pict the ef­fects unique to the liq­uid el­e­ment, how can the writer’s pen hope to re­pro­duce them?</p>
				<p>Cap­tain Nemo walked in front, and his com­pan­ion fol­lowed us a few steps to the rear. Con­seil and I stayed next to each other, as if day­dream­ing that through our metal cara­paces, a lit­tle po­lite con­ver­sa­tion might still be pos­si­ble! Al­ready I no longer felt the bulk­i­ness of my clothes, footwear, and air tank, nor the weight of the heavy sphere in­side which my head was rat­tling like an al­mond in its shell. Once im­mersed in wa­ter, all these ob­jects lost a part of their weight equal to the weight of the liq­uid they dis­placed, and thanks to this law of physics dis­cov­ered by Archimedes, I did just fine. I was no longer an in­ert mass, and I had, com­par­a­tively speak­ing, great free­dom of move­ment.</p>
				<p>Light­ing up the seafloor even thirty feet be­neath the sur­face of the ocean, the sun as­ton­ished me with its power. The so­lar rays eas­ily crossed this aque­ous mass and dis­persed its dark col­ors. I could eas­ily dis­tin­guish ob­jects 100 me­ters away. Farther on, the bot­tom was tinted with fine shades of ul­tra­ma­rine; then, off in the dis­tance, it turned blue and faded in the midst of a hazy dark­ness. Truly, this wa­ter sur­round­ing me was just a kind of air, denser than the at­mos­phere on land but al­most as trans­par­ent. Above me I could see the calm sur­face of the ocean.</p>
				<p>We were walk­ing on sand that was fine-grained and smooth, not wrin­kled like beach sand, which pre­serves the im­pres­sions left by the waves. This daz­zling car­pet was a real mir­ror, throw­ing back the sun’s rays with star­tling in­ten­sity. The out­come: an im­mense vista of re­flec­tions that pen­e­trated ev­ery liq­uid mol­e­cule. Will any­one be­lieve me if I as­sert that at this thirty-foot depth, I could see as if it was broad day­light?</p>
				<p>For a quar­ter of an hour, I trod this blaz­ing sand, which was strewn with tiny crumbs of seashell. Loom­ing like a long reef, the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i>’s hull dis­ap­peared lit­tle by lit­tle, but when night fell in the midst of the wa­ters, the ship’s bea­con would surely fa­cil­i­tate our re­turn on board, since its rays car­ried with per­fect dis­tinct­ness. This ef­fect is dif­fi­cult to un­der­stand for any­one who has never seen light beams so sharply de­fined on shore. There the dust that sat­u­rates the air gives such rays the ap­pear­ance of a lu­mi­nous fog; but above wa­ter as well as un­der­wa­ter, shafts of elec­tric light are trans­mit­ted with in­com­pa­ra­ble clar­ity.</p>
				<p>Mean­while we went ever on­ward, and these vast plains of sand seemed end­less. My hands parted liq­uid cur­tains that closed again be­hind me, and my foot­prints faded swiftly un­der the wa­ter’s pres­sure.</p>
				<p>Soon, scarcely blurred by their dis­tance from us, the forms of some ob­jects took shape be­fore my eyes. I rec­og­nized the lower slopes of some mag­nif­i­cent rocks car­peted by the finest zoophyte spec­i­mens, and right off, I was struck by an ef­fect unique to this medium.</p>
				<p>By then it was ten o’clock in the morn­ing. The sun’s rays hit the sur­face of the waves at a fairly oblique an­gle, de­com­pos­ing by re­frac­tion as though pass­ing through a prism; and when this light came in con­tact with flow­ers, rocks, buds, seashells, and polyps, the edges of these ob­jects were shaded with all seven hues of the so­lar spec­trum. This riot of rain­bow tints was a won­der, a feast for the eyes: a gen­uine kalei­do­scope of red, green, yel­low, or­ange, vi­o­let, in­digo, and blue; in short, the whole pal­ette of a color-happy painter! If only I had been able to share with Con­seil the in­tense sen­sa­tions ris­ing in my brain, com­pet­ing with him in ex­cla­ma­tions of won­der­ment! If only I had known, like Cap­tain Nemo and his com­pan­ion, how to ex­change thoughts by means of pre­ar­ranged sig­nals! So, for lack of any­thing bet­ter, I talked to my­self: I de­claimed in­side this cop­per box that topped my head, spend­ing more air on empty words than was per­haps ad­vis­able.</p>
				<p>Con­seil, like me, had stopped be­fore this splen­did sight. Ob­vi­ously, in the pres­ence of these zoophyte and mol­lusk spec­i­mens, the fine lad was clas­si­fy­ing his head off. Polyps and echin­o­derms abounded on the seafloor: var­i­ous isis coral, cor­nu­lar­ian coral liv­ing in iso­la­tion, tufts of vir­ginal genus <i epub:type="z3998:taxonomy">Oculina</i> for­merly known by the name “white coral,” prickly fun­gus coral in the shape of mush­rooms, sea anemone hold­ing on by their mus­cu­lar disks, pro­vid­ing a lit­eral flowerbed adorned by jel­ly­fish from the genus <i epub:type="z3998:taxonomy">Por­pita</i> wear­ing col­lars of azure ten­ta­cles, and starfish that span­gled the sand, in­clud­ing vein­like feather stars from the genus <i epub:type="z3998:taxonomy">As­tero­phy­ton</i> that were like fine lace em­broi­dered by the hands of wa­ter nymphs, their fes­toons sway­ing to the faint un­du­la­tions caused by our walk­ing. It filled me with real cha­grin to crush un­der­foot the gleam­ing mol­lusk sam­ples that lit­tered the seafloor by the thou­sands: con­cen­tric comb shells, ham­mer shells, co­quina (seashells that ac­tu­ally hop around), top-shell snails, red hel­met shells, an­gel-wing conchs, sea hares, and so many other ex­hibits from this in­ex­haustible ocean. But we had to keep walk­ing, and we went for­ward while over­head there scud­ded schools of Por­tuguese men-of-war that let their ul­tra­ma­rine ten­ta­cles drift in their wakes, medusas whose milky white or dainty pink para­sols were fes­tooned with azure tas­sels and shaded us from the sun’s rays, plus jel­ly­fish of the species <i epub:type="z3998:taxonomy">Pe­la­gia panopyra</i> that, in the dark, would have strewn our path with phos­pho­res­cent glim­mers!</p>
				<p>All these won­ders I glimpsed in the space of a quar­ter of a mile, barely paus­ing, fol­low­ing Cap­tain Nemo whose ges­tures kept beck­on­ing me on­ward. Soon the na­ture of the seafloor changed. The plains of sand were fol­lowed by a bed of that vis­cous slime Amer­i­cans call “ooze,” which is com­posed ex­clu­sively of seashells rich in lime­stone or sil­ica. Then we crossed a prairie of al­gae, open-sea plants that the wa­ters hadn’t yet torn loose, whose veg­e­ta­tion grew in wild pro­fu­sion. Soft to the foot, these densely tex­tured lawns would have ri­valed the most lux­u­ri­ant car­pets wo­ven by the hand of man. But while this green­ery was sprawl­ing un­der our steps, it didn’t ne­glect us over­head. The sur­face of the wa­ter was criss­crossed by a float­ing ar­bor of ma­rine plants be­long­ing to that su­per­abun­dant al­gae fam­ily that num­bers more than 2,000 known species. I saw long rib­bons of fu­cus drift­ing above me, some glob­u­lar, oth­ers tubu­lar: <i epub:type="z3998:taxonomy">Lau­ren­cia</i>, <i epub:type="z3998:taxonomy">Cla­doste­phus</i> with the slen­der­est fo­liage, <i epub:type="z3998:taxonomy">Rhody­menia pal­mata</i> re­sem­bling the fan shapes of cac­tus. I ob­served that green-col­ored plants kept closer to the sur­face of the sea, while reds oc­cu­pied a medium depth, which left blacks and browns in charge of de­sign­ing gar­dens and flowerbeds in the ocean’s lower strata.</p>
				<p>Th­ese al­gae are a gen­uine prodigy of cre­ation, one of the won­ders of world flora. This fam­ily pro­duces both the big­gest and small­est veg­eta­bles in the world. Be­cause, just as 40,000 near-in­vis­i­ble buds have been counted in one five-square-mil­lime­ter space, so also have fu­cus plants been gath­ered that were over 500 me­ters long!</p>
				<p>We had been gone from the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i> for about an hour and a half. It was al­most noon. I spot­ted this fact in the per­pen­dic­u­lar­ity of the sun’s rays, which were no longer re­fracted. The magic of these so­lar col­ors dis­ap­peared lit­tle by lit­tle, with emer­ald and sap­phire shades van­ish­ing from our sur­round­ings al­to­gether. We walked with steady steps that rang on the seafloor with as­ton­ish­ing in­ten­sity. The tini­est sounds were trans­mit­ted with a speed to which the ear is un­ac­cus­tomed on shore. In fact, wa­ter is a bet­ter con­duc­tor of sound than air, and un­der the waves noises carry four times as fast.</p>
				<p>Just then the seafloor be­gan to slope sharply down­ward. The light took on a uni­form hue. We reached a depth of 100 me­ters, by which point we were un­der­go­ing a pres­sure of ten at­mos­pheres. But my div­ing clothes were built along such lines that I never suf­fered from this pres­sure. I felt only a cer­tain tight­ness in the joints of my fin­gers, and even this dis­com­fort soon dis­ap­peared. As for the ex­haus­tion bound to ac­com­pany a two-hour stroll in such un­fa­mil­iar trap­pings—it was nil. Helped by the wa­ter, my move­ments were ex­e­cuted with star­tling ease.</p>
				<p>Ar­riv­ing at this 300-foot depth, I still de­tected the sun’s rays, but just barely. Their in­tense bril­liance had been fol­lowed by a red­dish twi­light, a mid­point be­tween day and night. But we could see well enough to find our way, and it still wasn’t nec­es­sary to ac­ti­vate the Ruhmko­rff de­vice.</p>
				<p>Just then Cap­tain Nemo stopped. He waited un­til I joined him, then he pointed a fin­ger at some dark masses out­lined in the shad­ows a short dis­tance away.</p>
				<p>“It’s the for­est of Cre­spo Is­land,” I thought; and I was not mis­taken.</p>
			</section>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
