<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="en-US" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: http://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Chapter 4</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="part-1" epub:type="part">
			<section id="chapter-1-4" epub:type="chapter">
				<h3 epub:type="title">
					<span class="first-child" epub:type="z3998:roman">IV</span>
					<span class="epub-type-subtitle" epub:type="subtitle">Ned Land</span>
				</h3>
				<p>Com­man­der Far­ragut was a good sea­man, wor­thy of the frigate he com­manded. His ship and he were one. He was its very soul. On the cetacean ques­tion no doubts arose in his mind, and he didn’t al­low the an­i­mal’s ex­is­tence to be dis­puted aboard his ves­sel. He be­lieved in it as cer­tain pi­ous women be­lieve in the leviathan from the Book of Job—out of faith, not rea­son. The mon­ster ex­isted, and he had vowed to rid the seas of it. The man was a sort of Knight of Rhodes, a lat­ter-day Sir Dieudonné of Gozo, on his way to fight an en­counter with the dragon dev­as­tat­ing the is­land. Either Com­man­der Far­ragut would slay the nar­whale, or the nar­whale would slay Com­man­der Far­ragut. No mid­dle of the road for these two.</p>
				<p>The ship’s of­fi­cers shared the views of their leader. They could be heard chat­ting, dis­cussing, ar­gu­ing, cal­cu­lat­ing the dif­fer­ent chances of an en­counter, and ob­serv­ing the vast ex­panse of the ocean. Vol­un­tary watches from the crosstrees of the top­gal­lant sail were self-im­posed by more than one who would have cursed such toil un­der any other cir­cum­stances. As of­ten as the sun swept over its daily arc, the masts were pop­u­lated with sailors whose feet itched and couldn’t hold still on the plank­ing of the deck be­low! And the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Abra­ham Lin­coln</i>’s stem­post hadn’t even cut the sus­pected wa­ters of the Pa­cific.</p>
				<p>As for the crew, they only wanted to en­counter the uni­corn, har­poon it, haul it on board, and carve it up. They sur­veyed the sea with scrupu­lous care. Be­sides, Com­man­der Far­ragut had men­tioned that a cer­tain sum of $2,000 was wait­ing for the man who first sighted the an­i­mal, be he cabin boy or sailor, mate or of­fi­cer. I’ll let the reader de­cide whether eyes got proper ex­er­cise aboard the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Abra­ham Lin­coln</i>.</p>
				<p>As for me, I didn’t lag be­hind the oth­ers and I yielded to no one my share in these daily ob­ser­va­tions. Our frigate would have had fivescore good rea­sons for re­nam­ing it­self the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Ar­gus</i>, af­ter that mytho­log­i­cal beast with 100 eyes! The lone rebel among us was Con­seil, who seemed ut­terly un­in­ter­ested in the ques­tion ex­cit­ing us and was out of step with the gen­eral en­thu­si­asm on board.</p>
				<p>As I said, Com­man­der Far­ragut had care­fully equipped his ship with all the gear needed to fish for a gi­gan­tic cetacean. No whal­ing ves­sel could have been bet­ter armed. We had ev­ery known mech­a­nism, from the hand-hurled har­poon, to the blun­der­buss fir­ing barbed ar­rows, to the duck gun with ex­plod­ing bul­lets. On the fore­cas­tle was mounted the lat­est model breech-load­ing can­non, very heavy of bar­rel and nar­row of bore, a weapon that would fig­ure in the Univer­sal Ex­hi­bi­tion of 1867. Made in Amer­ica, this valu­able in­stru­ment could fire a four-kilo­gram con­i­cal pro­jec­tile an av­er­age dis­tance of six­teen kilo­me­ters with­out the least bother.</p>
				<p>So the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Abra­ham Lin­coln</i> wasn’t lack­ing in means of de­struc­tion. But it had bet­ter still. It had Ned Land, the King of Har­poon­ers.</p>
				<p>Gifted with un­com­mon man­ual abil­ity, Ned Land was a Cana­dian who had no equal in his dan­ger­ous trade. Dex­ter­ity, cool­ness, brav­ery, and cun­ning were virtues he pos­sessed to a high de­gree, and it took a truly crafty baleen whale or an ex­cep­tion­ally as­tute sperm whale to elude the thrusts of his har­poon.</p>
				<p>Ned Land was about forty years old. A man of great height—over six English feet—he was pow­er­fully built, se­ri­ous in man­ner, not very so­cia­ble, some­times head­strong, and quite ill-tem­pered when crossed. His looks caught the at­ten­tion, and above all the strength of his gaze, which gave a unique em­pha­sis to his fa­cial ap­pear­ance.</p>
				<p>Com­man­der Far­ragut, to my think­ing, had made a wise move in hir­ing on this man. With his eye and his throw­ing arm, he was worth the whole crew all by him­self. I can do no bet­ter than to com­pare him with a pow­er­ful tele­scope that could dou­ble as a can­non al­ways ready to fire.</p>
				<p>To say Cana­dian is to say French, and as unso­cia­ble as Ned Land was, I must ad­mit he took a def­i­nite lik­ing to me. No doubt it was my na­tion­al­ity that at­tracted him. It was an op­por­tu­nity for him to speak, and for me to hear, that old Ra­belaisian di­alect still used in some Cana­dian prov­inces. The har­pooner’s fam­ily orig­i­nated in Que­bec, and they were al­ready a line of bold fish­er­men back in the days when this town still be­longed to France.</p>
				<p>Lit­tle by lit­tle Ned de­vel­oped a taste for chat­ting, and I loved hear­ing the tales of his ad­ven­tures in the po­lar seas. He de­scribed his fish­ing trips and his bat­tles with great nat­u­ral lyri­cism. His tales took on the form of an epic poem, and I felt I was hear­ing some Cana­dian Homer recit­ing his <i epub:type="se:name.publication.poem">Iliad</i> of the High Arc­tic re­gions.</p>
				<p>I’m writ­ing of this bold com­pan­ion as I cur­rently know him. Be­cause we’ve be­come old friends, united in that per­ma­nent com­rade­ship born and ce­mented dur­ing only the most fright­ful crises! Ah, my gal­lant Ned! I ask only to live 100 years more, the longer to re­mem­ber you!</p>
				<p>And now, what were Ned Land’s views on this ques­tion of a ma­rine mon­ster? I must ad­mit that he flatly didn’t be­lieve in the uni­corn, and alone on board, he didn’t share the gen­eral con­vic­tion. He avoided even deal­ing with the sub­ject, for which one day I felt com­pelled to take him to task.</p>
				<p>Dur­ing the mag­nif­i­cent evening of June 25—in other words, three weeks af­ter our de­par­ture—the frigate lay abreast of Cabo Blanco, thirty miles to lee­ward of the coast of Patag­o­nia. We had crossed the Tropic of Capri­corn, and the Strait of Mag­el­lan opened less than 700 miles to the south. Be­fore eight days were out, the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Abra­ham Lin­coln</i> would plow the waves of the Pa­cific.</p>
				<p>Seated on the af­ter­deck, Ned Land and I chat­ted about one thing and an­other, star­ing at that mys­te­ri­ous sea whose depths to this day are be­yond the reach of hu­man eyes. Quite nat­u­rally, I led our con­ver­sa­tion around to the gi­ant uni­corn, and I weighed our ex­pe­di­tion’s var­i­ous chances for suc­cess or fail­ure. Then, see­ing that Ned just let me talk with­out say­ing much him­self, I pressed him more closely.</p>
				<p>“Ned,” I asked him, “how can you still doubt the re­al­ity of this cetacean we’re af­ter? Do you have any par­tic­u­lar rea­sons for be­ing so skep­ti­cal?”</p>
				<p>The har­pooner stared at me awhile be­fore re­ply­ing, slapped his broad fore­head in one of his stan­dard ges­tures, closed his eyes as if to col­lect him­self, and fi­nally said:</p>
				<p>“Just maybe, Pro­fes­sor Aron­nax.”</p>
				<p>“But Ned, you’re a pro­fes­sional whaler, a man fa­mil­iar with all the great ma­rine mam­mals—your mind should eas­ily ac­cept this hy­poth­e­sis of an enor­mous cetacean, and you ought to be the last one to doubt it un­der these cir­cum­stances!”</p>
				<p>“That’s just where you’re mis­taken, pro­fes­sor,” Ned replied. “The com­mon man may still be­lieve in fab­u­lous comets cross­ing outer space, or in pre­his­toric mon­sters liv­ing at the earth’s core, but as­tronomers and ge­ol­o­gists don’t swal­low such fairy tales. It’s the same with whalers. I’ve chased plenty of cetaceans, I’ve har­pooned a good num­ber, I’ve killed sev­eral. But no mat­ter how pow­er­ful and well armed they were, nei­ther their tails or their tusks could punc­ture the sheet-iron plates of a steamer.”</p>
				<p>“Even so, Ned, peo­ple men­tion ves­sels that nar­whale tusks have run clean through.”</p>
				<p>“Wooden ships maybe,” the Cana­dian replied. “But I’ve never seen the like. So till I have proof to the con­trary, I’ll deny that baleen whales, sperm whales, or uni­corns can do any such thing.”</p>
				<p>“Lis­ten to me, Ned—”</p>
				<p>“No, no, pro­fes­sor. I’ll go along with any­thing you want ex­cept that. Some gi­gan­tic dev­il­fish maybe … ?”</p>
				<p>“Even less likely, Ned. The dev­il­fish is merely a mol­lusk, and even this name hints at its semiliq­uid flesh, be­cause it’s Latin mean­ing soft one. The dev­il­fish doesn’t be­long to the ver­te­brate branch, and even if it were 500 feet long, it would still be ut­terly harm­less to ships like the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Sco­tia</i> or the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Abra­ham Lin­coln</i>. Con­se­quently, the feats of krak­ens or other mon­sters of that ilk must be rel­e­gated to the realm of fic­tion.”</p>
				<p>“So, Mr. Nat­u­ral­ist,” Ned Land con­tin­ued in a ban­ter­ing tone, “you’ll just keep on be­liev­ing in the ex­is­tence of some enor­mous cetacean … ?”</p>
				<p>“Yes, Ned, I re­peat it with a con­vic­tion backed by fac­tual logic. I be­lieve in the ex­is­tence of a mam­mal with a pow­er­ful con­sti­tu­tion, be­long­ing to the ver­te­brate branch like baleen whales, sperm whales, or dol­phins, and armed with a tusk made of horn that has tremen­dous pen­e­trat­ing power.”</p>
				<p>“Humph!” the har­pooner put in, shak­ing his head with the at­ti­tude of a man who doesn’t want to be con­vinced.</p>
				<p>“Note well, my fine Cana­dian,” I went on, “if such an an­i­mal ex­ists, if it lives deep in the ocean, if it fre­quents the liq­uid strata lo­cated miles be­neath the sur­face of the wa­ter, it needs to have a con­sti­tu­tion so solid, it de­fies all com­par­i­son.”</p>
				<p>“And why this pow­er­ful con­sti­tu­tion?” Ned asked.</p>
				<p>“Be­cause it takes in­cal­cu­la­ble strength just to live in those deep strata and with­stand their pres­sure.”</p>
				<p>“Oh re­ally?” Ned said, tip­ping me a wink.</p>
				<p>“Oh re­ally, and I can prove it to you with a few sim­ple fig­ures.”</p>
				<p>“Bosh!” Ned replied. “You can make fig­ures do any­thing you want!”</p>
				<p>“In busi­ness, Ned, but not in math­e­mat­ics. Lis­ten to me. Let’s ac­cept that the pres­sure of one at­mos­phere is rep­re­sented by the pres­sure of a col­umn of wa­ter thirty-two feet high. In re­al­ity, such a col­umn of wa­ter wouldn’t be quite so high be­cause here we’re deal­ing with salt wa­ter, which is denser than fresh wa­ter. Well then, when you dive un­der the waves, Ned, for ev­ery thirty-two feet of wa­ter above you, your body is tol­er­at­ing the pres­sure of one more at­mos­phere, in other words, one more kilo­gram per each square cen­time­ter on your body’s sur­face. So it fol­lows that at 320 feet down, this pres­sure is equal to ten at­mos­pheres, to 100 at­mos­pheres at 3,200 feet, and to 1,000 at­mos­pheres at 32,000 feet, that is, at about two and a half ver­ti­cal leagues down. Which is tan­ta­mount to say­ing that if you could reach such a depth in the ocean, each square cen­time­ter on your body’s sur­face would be ex­pe­ri­enc­ing 1,000 kilo­grams of pres­sure. Now, my gal­lant Ned, do you know how many square cen­time­ters you have on your bod­ily sur­face?”</p>
				<p>“I haven’t the fog­gi­est no­tion, Pro­fes­sor Aron­nax.”</p>
				<p>“About 17,000.”</p>
				<p>“As many as that?”</p>
				<p>“Yes, and since the at­mos­phere’s pres­sure ac­tu­ally weighs slightly more than one kilo­gram per square cen­time­ter, your 17,000 square cen­time­ters are tol­er­at­ing 17,568 kilo­grams at this very mo­ment.”</p>
				<p>“Without my notic­ing it?”</p>
				<p>“Without your notic­ing it. And if you aren’t crushed by so much pres­sure, it’s be­cause the air pen­e­trates the in­te­rior of your body with equal pres­sure. When the in­side and out­side pres­sures are in per­fect bal­ance, they neu­tral­ize each other and al­low you to tol­er­ate them with­out dis­com­fort. But in the wa­ter it’s an­other story.”</p>
				<p>“Yes, I see,” Ned replied, grow­ing more in­ter­ested. “Be­cause the wa­ter sur­rounds me but doesn’t pen­e­trate me.”</p>
				<p>“Pre­cisely, Ned. So at thirty-two feet be­neath the sur­face of the sea, you’ll un­dergo a pres­sure of 17,568 kilo­grams; at 320 feet, or ten times greater pres­sure, it’s 175,680 kilo­grams; at 3,200 feet, or 100 times greater pres­sure, it’s 1,756,800 kilo­grams; fi­nally, at 32,000 feet, or 1,000 times greater pres­sure, it’s 17,568,000 kilo­grams; in other words, you’d be squashed as flat as if you’d just been yanked from be­tween the plates of a hy­draulic press!”</p>
				<p>“Fire and brim­stone!” Ned put in.</p>
				<p>“All right then, my fine har­pooner, if ver­te­brates sev­eral hun­dred me­ters long and pro­por­tion­ate in bulk live at such depths, their sur­face ar­eas make up mil­lions of square cen­time­ters, and the pres­sure they un­dergo must be as­sessed in bil­lions of kilo­grams. Cal­cu­late, then, how much re­sis­tance of bone struc­ture and strength of con­sti­tu­tion they’d need in or­der to with­stand such pres­sures!”</p>
				<p>“They’d need to be man­u­fac­tured,” Ned Land replied, “from sheet-iron plates eight inches thick, like iron­clad frigates.”</p>
				<p>“Right, Ned, and then pic­ture the dam­age such a mass could in­flict if it were launched with the speed of an ex­press train against a ship’s hull.”</p>
				<p>“Yes … in­deed … maybe,” the Cana­dian replied, stag­gered by these fig­ures but still not will­ing to give in.</p>
				<p>“Well, have I con­vinced you?”</p>
				<p>“You’ve con­vinced me of one thing, Mr. Nat­u­ral­ist. That deep in the sea, such an­i­mals would need to be just as strong as you say—if they ex­ist.”</p>
				<p>“But if they don’t ex­ist, my stub­born har­pooner, how do you ex­plain the ac­ci­dent that hap­pened to the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Sco­tia</i>?”</p>
				<p>“It’s maybe …” Ned said, hes­i­tat­ing.</p>
				<p>“Go on!”</p>
				<p>“Be­cause … it just couldn’t be true!” the Cana­dian replied, un­con­sciously echo­ing a fa­mous catch­phrase of the sci­en­tist Arago.</p>
				<p>But this re­ply proved noth­ing, other than how bull­headed the har­pooner could be. That day I pressed him no fur­ther. The <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Sco­tia</i>’s ac­ci­dent was un­de­ni­able. Its hole was real enough that it had to be plugged up, and I don’t think a hole’s ex­is­tence can be more em­phat­i­cally proven. Now then, this hole didn’t make it­self, and since it hadn’t re­sulted from un­der­wa­ter rocks or un­der­wa­ter ma­chines, it must have been caused by the per­fo­rat­ing tool of some an­i­mal.</p>
				<p>Now, for all the rea­sons put for­ward to this point, I be­lieved that this an­i­mal was a mem­ber of the branch <i epub:type="z3998:taxonomy">Ver­te­brata</i>, class <i epub:type="z3998:taxonomy">Mam­malia</i>, group <i epub:type="z3998:taxonomy">Pis­ci­forma</i>, and fi­nally, or­der <i epub:type="z3998:taxonomy">Ce­tacea</i>. As for the fam­ily in which it would be placed (baleen whale, sperm whale, or dol­phin), the genus to which it be­longed, and the species in which it would find its proper home, these ques­tions had to be left for later. To an­swer them called for dis­sect­ing this un­known mon­ster; to dis­sect it called for catch­ing it; to catch it called for har­poon­ing it—which was Ned Land’s busi­ness; to har­poon it called for sight­ing it—which was the crew’s busi­ness; and to sight it called for en­coun­ter­ing it—which was a chancy busi­ness.</p>
			</section>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
