<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="en-US" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: http://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Chapter 10</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="part-1" epub:type="part">
			<section id="chapter-1-10" epub:type="chapter">
				<h3 epub:type="title">
					<span class="first-child" epub:type="z3998:roman">X</span>
					<span class="epub-type-subtitle" epub:type="subtitle">A Man of the Waters</span>
				</h3>
				<p>It was the ship’s com­man­der who had just spo­ken.</p>
				<p>At these words Ned Land stood up quickly. Nearly stran­gled, the stew­ard stag­gered out at a sig­nal from his su­pe­rior; but such was the com­man­der’s au­thor­ity aboard his ves­sel, not one ges­ture gave away the re­sent­ment that this man must have felt to­ward the Cana­dian. In si­lence we waited for the out­come of this scene; Con­seil, in spite of him­self, seemed al­most fas­ci­nated, I was stunned.</p>
				<p>Arms crossed, lean­ing against a cor­ner of the ta­ble, the com­man­der stud­ied us with great care. Was he re­luc­tant to speak fur­ther? Did he re­gret those words he had just pro­nounced in French? You would have thought so.</p>
				<p>After a few mo­ments of si­lence, which none of us would have dreamed of in­ter­rupt­ing:</p>
				<p>“Gentle­men,” he said in a calm, pen­e­trat­ing voice, “I speak French, English, Ger­man, and Latin with equal flu­ency. Hence I could have an­swered you as early as our ini­tial in­ter­view, but first I wanted to make your ac­quain­tance and then think things over. Your four ver­sions of the same nar­ra­tive, per­fectly con­sis­tent by and large, es­tab­lished your per­sonal iden­ti­ties for me. I now know that sheer chance has placed in my pres­ence Pro­fes­sor Pierre Aron­nax, spe­cial­ist in nat­u­ral his­tory at the Paris Mu­seum and en­trusted with a sci­en­tific mis­sion abroad, his manser­vant Con­seil, and Ned Land, a har­pooner of Cana­dian ori­gin aboard the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Abra­ham Lin­coln</i>, a frigate in the na­tional navy of the United States of Amer­ica.”</p>
				<p>I bowed in agree­ment. The com­man­der hadn’t put a ques­tion to me. So no an­swer was called for. This man ex­pressed him­self with per­fect ease and with­out a trace of an ac­cent. His phras­ing was clear, his words well cho­sen, his fa­cil­ity in elo­cu­tion re­mark­able. And yet, to me, he didn’t have “the feel” of a fel­low coun­try­man.</p>
				<p>He went on with the con­ver­sa­tion as fol­lows:</p>
				<p>“No doubt, sir, you’ve felt that I waited rather too long be­fore pay­ing you this sec­ond visit. After dis­cov­er­ing your iden­ti­ties, I wanted to weigh care­fully what pol­icy to pur­sue to­ward you. I had great dif­fi­culty de­cid­ing. Some ex­tremely in­con­ve­nient cir­cum­stances have brought you into the pres­ence of a man who has cut him­self off from hu­man­ity. Your com­ing has dis­rupted my whole ex­is­tence.”</p>
				<p>“Un­in­ten­tion­ally,” I said.</p>
				<p>“Un­in­ten­tion­ally?” the stranger replied, rais­ing his voice a lit­tle. “Was it un­in­ten­tion­ally that the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Abra­ham Lin­coln</i> hunted me on ev­ery sea? Was it un­in­ten­tion­ally that you trav­eled aboard that frigate? Was it un­in­ten­tion­ally that your shells bounced off my ship’s hull? Was it un­in­ten­tion­ally that Mr. Ned Land hit me with his har­poon?”</p>
				<p>I de­tected a con­trolled ir­ri­ta­tion in these words. But there was a per­fectly nat­u­ral re­ply to these charges, and I made it.</p>
				<p>“Sir,” I said, “you’re surely un­aware of the dis­cus­sions that have taken place in Europe and Amer­ica with your­self as the sub­ject. You don’t re­al­ize that var­i­ous ac­ci­dents, caused by col­li­sions with your un­der­wa­ter ma­chine, have aroused pub­lic pas­sions on those two con­ti­nents. I’ll spare you the in­nu­mer­able hy­pothe­ses with which we’ve tried to ex­plain this in­ex­pli­ca­ble phe­nom­e­non, whose se­cret is yours alone. But please un­der­stand that the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Abra­ham Lin­coln</i> chased you over the Pa­cific high seas in the be­lief it was hunt­ing some pow­er­ful ma­rine mon­ster, which had to be purged from the ocean at all cost.”</p>
				<p>A half smile curled the com­man­der’s lips; then, in a calmer tone:</p>
				<p>“Pro­fes­sor Aron­nax,” he replied, “do you dare claim that your frigate wouldn’t have chased and can­non­aded an un­der­wa­ter boat as read­ily as a mon­ster?”</p>
				<p>This ques­tion baf­fled me, since Com­man­der Far­ragut would cer­tainly have shown no such hes­i­ta­tion. He would have seen it as his sworn duty to de­stroy a con­trivance of this kind just as promptly as a gi­gan­tic nar­whale.</p>
				<p>“So you un­der­stand, sir,” the stranger went on, “that I have a right to treat you as my en­emy.”</p>
				<p>I kept quiet, with good rea­son. What was the use of de­bat­ing such a propo­si­tion, when su­pe­rior force can wipe out the best ar­gu­ments?</p>
				<p>“It took me a good while to de­cide,” the com­man­der went on. “Noth­ing obliged me to grant you hos­pi­tal­ity. If I were to part com­pany with you, I’d have no per­sonal in­ter­est in ever see­ing you again. I could put you back on the plat­form of this ship that has served as your refuge. I could sink un­der the sea, and I could for­get you ever ex­isted. Wouldn’t that be my right?”</p>
				<p>“Per­haps it would be the right of a sav­age,” I replied. “But not that of a civ­i­lized man.”</p>
				<p>“Pro­fes­sor,” the com­man­der replied swiftly, “I’m not what you term a civ­i­lized man! I’ve sev­ered all ties with so­ci­ety, for rea­sons that I alone have the right to ap­pre­ci­ate. There­fore I obey none of its reg­u­la­tions, and I in­sist that you never in­voke them in front of me!”</p>
				<p>This was plain speak­ing. A flash of anger and scorn lit up the stranger’s eyes, and I glimpsed a fear­some past in this man’s life. Not only had he placed him­self be­yond hu­man laws, he had ren­dered him­self in­de­pen­dent, out of all reach, free in the strictest sense of the word! For who would dare chase him to the depths of the sea when he thwarted all at­tacks on the sur­face? What ship could with­stand a col­li­sion with his un­der­wa­ter <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Mon­i­tor</i>? What ar­mor plate, no mat­ter how heavy, could bear the thrusts of his spur? No man among men could call him to ac­count for his ac­tions. God, if he be­lieved in Him, his con­science if he had one—these were the only judges to whom he was an­swer­able.</p>
				<p>Th­ese thoughts swiftly crossed my mind while this strange in­di­vid­ual fell silent, like some­one com­pletely self-ab­sorbed. I re­garded him with a mix­ture of fear and fas­ci­na­tion, in the same way, no doubt, that Oedi­pus re­garded the Sphinx.</p>
				<p>After a fairly long si­lence, the com­man­der went on with our con­ver­sa­tion.</p>
				<p>“So I had dif­fi­culty de­cid­ing,” he said. “But I con­cluded that my per­sonal in­ter­ests could be rec­on­ciled with that nat­u­ral com­pas­sion to which ev­ery hu­man be­ing has a right. Since fate has brought you here, you’ll stay aboard my ves­sel. You’ll be free here, and in ex­change for that free­dom, more­over to­tally re­lated to it, I’ll lay on you just one con­di­tion. Your word that you’ll sub­mit to it will be suf­fi­cient.”</p>
				<p>“Go on, sir,” I replied. “I as­sume this con­di­tion is one an hon­est man can ac­cept?”</p>
				<p>“Yes, sir. Just this. It’s pos­si­ble that cer­tain un­fore­seen events may force me to con­fine you to your cab­ins for some hours, or even for some days as the case may be. Since I pre­fer never to use vi­o­lence, I ex­pect from you in such a case, even more than in any other, your un­ques­tion­ing obe­di­ence. By act­ing in this way, I shield you from com­plic­ity, I ab­solve you of all re­spon­si­bil­ity, since I my­self make it im­pos­si­ble for you to see what you aren’t meant to see. Do you ac­cept this con­di­tion?”</p>
				<p>So things hap­pened on board that were quite odd to say the least, things never to be seen by peo­ple not plac­ing them­selves be­yond so­ci­ety’s laws! Among all the sur­prises the fu­ture had in store for me, this would not be the mildest.</p>
				<p>“We ac­cept,” I replied. “Only, I’ll ask your per­mis­sion, sir, to ad­dress a ques­tion to you, just one.”</p>
				<p>“Go ahead, sir.”</p>
				<p>“You said we’d be free aboard your ves­sel?”</p>
				<p>“Com­pletely.”</p>
				<p>“Then I would ask what you mean by this free­dom.”</p>
				<p>“Why, the free­dom to come, go, see, and even closely ob­serve ev­ery­thing hap­pen­ing here—ex­cept un­der cer­tain rare cir­cum­stances—in short, the free­dom we our­selves en­joy, my com­pan­ions and I.”</p>
				<p>It was ob­vi­ous that we did not un­der­stand each other.</p>
				<p>“Par­don me, sir,” I went on, “but that’s merely the free­dom that ev­ery pris­oner has, the free­dom to pace his cell! That’s not enough for us.”</p>
				<p>“Nev­er­the­less, it will have to do!”</p>
				<p>“What! We must give up see­ing our home­land, friends, and rel­a­tives ever again?”</p>
				<p>“Yes, sir. But giv­ing up that in­tol­er­a­ble earthly yoke that some men call free­dom is per­haps less painful than you think!”</p>
				<p>“By thun­der!” Ned Land shouted. “I’ll never prom­ise I won’t try get­ting out of here!”</p>
				<p>“I didn’t ask for such a prom­ise, Mr. Land,” the com­man­der replied coldly.</p>
				<p>“Sir,” I replied, flar­ing up in spite of my­self, “you’re tak­ing un­fair ad­van­tage of us! This is sheer cru­elty!”</p>
				<p>“No, sir, it’s an act of mercy! You’re my pris­on­ers of war! I’ve cared for you when, with a sin­gle word, I could plunge you back into the ocean depths! You at­tacked me! You’ve just stum­bled on a se­cret no liv­ing man must probe, the se­cret of my en­tire ex­is­tence! Do you think I’ll send you back to a world that must know noth­ing more of me? Never! By keep­ing you on board, it isn’t you whom I care for, it’s me!”</p>
				<p>Th­ese words in­di­cated that the com­man­der pur­sued a pol­icy im­per­vi­ous to ar­gu­ments.</p>
				<p>“Then, sir,” I went on, “you give us, quite sim­ply, a choice be­tween life and death?”</p>
				<p>“Quite sim­ply.”</p>
				<p>“My friends,” I said, “to a ques­tion couched in these terms, our an­swer can be taken for granted. But no solemn prom­ises bind us to the com­man­der of this ves­sel.”</p>
				<p>“None, sir,” the stranger replied.</p>
				<p>Then, in a gen­tler voice, he went on:</p>
				<p>“Now, al­low me to fin­ish what I have to tell you. I’ve heard of you, Pro­fes­sor Aron­nax. You, if not your com­pan­ions, won’t per­haps com­plain too much about the stroke of fate that has brought us to­gether. Among the books that make up my fa­vorite read­ing, you’ll find the work you’ve pub­lished on the great ocean depths. I’ve pored over it. You’ve taken your stud­ies as far as ter­res­trial sci­ence can go. But you don’t know ev­ery­thing be­cause you haven’t seen ev­ery­thing. Let me tell you, pro­fes­sor, you won’t re­gret the time you spend aboard my ves­sel. You’re go­ing to voy­age through a land of won­ders. Stunned amaze­ment will prob­a­bly be your ha­bit­ual state of mind. It will be a long while be­fore you tire of the sights con­stantly be­fore your eyes. I’m go­ing to make an­other un­der­wa­ter tour of the world—per­haps my last, who knows?—and I’ll re­view ev­ery­thing I’ve stud­ied in the depths of these seas that I’ve crossed so of­ten, and you can be my fel­low stu­dent. Start­ing this very day, you’ll en­ter a new el­e­ment, you’ll see what no hu­man be­ing has ever seen be­fore—since my men and I no longer count—and thanks to me, you’re go­ing to learn the ul­ti­mate se­crets of our planet.”</p>
				<p>I can’t deny it; the com­man­der’s words had a tremen­dous ef­fect on me. He had caught me on my weak side, and I mo­men­tar­ily for­got that not even this sub­lime ex­pe­ri­ence was worth the loss of my free­dom. Be­sides, I counted on the fu­ture to re­solve this im­por­tant ques­tion. So I was con­tent to re­ply:</p>
				<p>“Sir, even though you’ve cut your­self off from hu­man­ity, I can see that you haven’t dis­owned all hu­man feel­ing. We’re cast­aways whom you’ve char­i­ta­bly taken aboard, we’ll never for­get that. Speak­ing for my­self, I don’t rule out that the in­ter­ests of sci­ence could over­ride even the need for free­dom, which prom­ises me that, in ex­change, our en­counter will pro­vide great re­wards.”</p>
				<p>I thought the com­man­der would of­fer me his hand, to seal our agree­ment. He did noth­ing of the sort. I re­gret­ted that.</p>
				<p>“One last ques­tion,” I said, just as this in­ex­pli­ca­ble be­ing seemed ready to with­draw.</p>
				<p>“Ask it, pro­fes­sor.”</p>
				<p>“By what name am I to call you?”</p>
				<p>“Sir,” the com­man­der replied, “to you, I’m sim­ply Cap­tain Nemo<a class="epub-type-noteref" href="../text/endnotes.xhtml#note-7" id="note-7" epub:type="noteref">7</a>; to me, you and your com­pan­ions are sim­ply pas­sen­gers on the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i>.”</p>
				<p>Cap­tain Nemo called out. A stew­ard ap­peared. The cap­tain gave him his or­ders in that strange lan­guage I couldn’t even iden­tify. Then, turn­ing to the Cana­dian and Con­seil:</p>
				<p>“A meal is wait­ing for you in your cabin,” he told them. “Kindly fol­low this man.”</p>
				<p>“That’s an of­fer I can’t refuse!” the har­pooner replied.</p>
				<p>After be­ing con­fined for over thirty hours, he and Con­seil were fi­nally out of this cell.</p>
				<p>“And now, Pro­fes­sor Aron­nax, our own break­fast is ready. Al­low me to lead the way.”</p>
				<p>“Yours to com­mand, cap­tain.”</p>
				<p>I fol­lowed Cap­tain Nemo, and as soon as I passed through the door­way, I went down a kind of elec­tri­cally lit pas­sage­way that re­sem­bled a gang­way on a ship. After a stretch of some ten me­ters, a sec­ond door opened be­fore me.</p>
				<p>I then en­tered a din­ing room, dec­o­rated and fur­nished in aus­tere good taste. In­laid with ebony trim, tall oaken side­boards stood at both ends of this room, and sparkling on their shelves were stag­gered rows of earth­en­ware, porce­lain, and glass of in­cal­cu­la­ble value. There sil­ver-plated din­ner­ware gleamed un­der rays pour­ing from light fix­tures in the ceil­ing, whose glare was soft­ened and tem­pered by del­i­cately painted de­signs.</p>
				<p>In the cen­ter of this room stood a ta­ble, richly spread. Cap­tain Nemo in­di­cated the place I was to oc­cupy.</p>
				<p>“Be seated,” he told me, “and eat like the fam­ished man you must be.”</p>
				<p>Our break­fast con­sisted of sev­eral dishes whose con­tents were all sup­plied by the sea, and some foods whose na­ture and deriva­tion were un­known to me. They were good, I ad­mit, but with a pe­cu­liar fla­vor to which I would soon grow ac­cus­tomed. Th­ese var­i­ous food items seemed to be rich in phos­pho­rous, and I thought that they, too, must have been of ma­rine ori­gin.</p>
				<p>Cap­tain Nemo stared at me. I had asked him noth­ing, but he read my thoughts, and on his own he an­swered the ques­tions I was itch­ing to ad­dress him.</p>
				<p>“Most of these dishes are new to you,” he told me. “But you can con­sume them with­out fear. They’re healthy and nour­ish­ing. I re­nounced ter­res­trial foods long ago, and I’m none the worse for it. My crew are strong and full of en­ergy, and they eat what I eat.”</p>
				<p>“So,” I said, “all these foods are prod­ucts of the sea?”</p>
				<p>“Yes, pro­fes­sor, the sea sup­plies all my needs. Some­times I cast my nets in our wake, and I pull them up ready to burst. Some­times I go hunt­ing right in the midst of this el­e­ment that has long seemed so far out of man’s reach, and I cor­ner the game that dwells in my un­der­wa­ter forests. Like the flocks of old Pro­teus, King Nep­tune’s shep­herd, my herds graze with­out fear on the ocean’s im­mense prairies. There I own vast prop­er­ties that I har­vest my­self, and which are for­ever sown by the hand of the Creator of All Things.”</p>
				<p>I stared at Cap­tain Nemo in def­i­nite as­ton­ish­ment, and I an­swered him:</p>
				<p>“Sir, I un­der­stand per­fectly how your nets can fur­nish ex­cel­lent fish for your ta­ble; I un­der­stand less how you can chase aquatic game in your un­der­wa­ter forests; but how a piece of red meat, no mat­ter how small, can fig­ure in your menu, that I don’t un­der­stand at all.”</p>
				<p>“Nor I, sir,” Cap­tain Nemo an­swered me. “I never touch the flesh of land an­i­mals.”</p>
				<p>“Nev­er­the­less, this …” I went on, point­ing to a dish where some slices of loin were still left.</p>
				<p>“What you be­lieve to be red meat, pro­fes­sor, is noth­ing other than loin of sea tur­tle. Sim­i­larly, here are some dol­phin liv­ers you might mis­take for stewed pork. My chef is a skill­ful food pro­ces­sor who ex­cels at pick­ling and pre­serv­ing these var­i­ous ex­hibits from the ocean. Feel free to sam­ple all of these foods. Here are some pre­serves of sea cu­cum­ber that a Malaysian would de­clare to be un­ri­valed in the en­tire world, here’s cream from milk fur­nished by the ud­ders of cetaceans, and sugar from the huge fu­cus plants in the North Sea; and fi­nally, al­low me to of­fer you some mar­malade of sea anemone, equal to that from the tasti­est fruits.”</p>
				<p>So I sam­pled away, more as a cu­rios­ity seeker than an epi­cure, while Cap­tain Nemo de­lighted me with his in­cred­i­ble anec­dotes.</p>
				<p>“But this sea, Pro­fes­sor Aron­nax,” he told me, “this prodi­gious, in­ex­haustible wet nurse of a sea not only feeds me, she dresses me as well. That fab­ric cov­er­ing you was wo­ven from the masses of fil­a­ments that an­chor cer­tain seashells; as the an­cients were wont to do, it was dyed with pur­ple ink from the murex snail and shaded with vi­o­let tints that I ex­tract from a ma­rine slug, the Mediter­ranean sea hare. The per­fumes you’ll find on the wash­stand in your cabin were pro­duced from the ooz­ings of ma­rine plants. Your mat­tress was made from the ocean’s soft­est eel­grass. Your quill pen will be whale­bone, your ink a juice se­creted by cut­tle­fish or squid. Every­thing comes to me from the sea, just as some­day ev­ery­thing will re­turn to it!”</p>
				<p>“You love the sea, cap­tain.”</p>
				<p>“Yes, I love it! The sea is the be all and end all! It cov­ers seven-tenths of the planet earth. Its breath is clean and healthy. It’s an im­mense wilder­ness where a man is never lonely, be­cause he feels life astir on ev­ery side. The sea is sim­ply the ve­hi­cle for a prodi­gious, un­earthly mode of ex­is­tence; it’s sim­ply move­ment and love; it’s liv­ing in­fin­ity, as one of your po­ets put it. And in essence, pro­fes­sor, na­ture is here made man­i­fest by all three of her king­doms, min­eral, veg­etable, and an­i­mal. The last of these is am­ply rep­re­sented by the four zoophyte groups, three classes of ar­tic­u­lates, five classes of mol­lusks, and three ver­te­brate classes: mam­mals, rep­tiles, and those count­less le­gions of fish, an in­fi­nite or­der of an­i­mals to­tal­ing more than 13,000 species, of which only one-tenth be­long to fresh wa­ter. The sea is a vast pool of na­ture. Our globe be­gan with the sea, so to speak, and who can say we won’t end with it! Here lies supreme tran­quil­ity. The sea doesn’t be­long to tyrants. On its sur­face they can still ex­er­cise their in­iq­ui­tous claims, bat­tle each other, de­vour each other, haul ev­ery earthly hor­ror. But thirty feet be­low sea level, their do­min­ion ceases, their in­flu­ence fades, their power van­ishes! Ah, sir, live! Live in the heart of the seas! Here alone lies in­de­pen­dence! Here I rec­og­nize no su­pe­ri­ors! Here I’m free!”</p>
				<p>Cap­tain Nemo sud­denly fell silent in the midst of this en­thu­si­as­tic out­pour­ing. Had he let him­self get car­ried away, past the bounds of his ha­bit­ual re­serve? Had he said too much? For a few mo­ments he strolled up and down, all aquiver. Then his nerves grew calmer, his fa­cial fea­tures re­cov­ered their usual icy com­po­sure, and turn­ing to me:</p>
				<p>“Now, pro­fes­sor,” he said, “if you’d like to in­spect the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i>, I’m yours to com­mand.”</p>
			</section>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
