<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="en-US" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: http://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Chapter 11</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="part-2" epub:type="part">
			<section id="chapter-2-11" epub:type="chapter">
				<h3 epub:type="title">
					<span class="first-child" epub:type="z3998:roman">XI</span>
					<span class="epub-type-subtitle" epub:type="subtitle">The Sargasso Sea</span>
				</h3>
				<p>The <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i> didn’t change di­rec­tion. For the time be­ing, then, we had to set aside any hope of re­turn­ing to Euro­pean seas. Cap­tain Nemo kept his prow point­ing south. Where was he tak­ing us? I was afraid to guess.</p>
				<p>That day the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i> crossed an odd part of the At­lantic Ocean. No one is un­aware of the ex­is­tence of that great warm-wa­ter cur­rent known by name as the Gulf Stream. After emerg­ing from chan­nels off Florida, it heads to­ward Spitzber­gen. But be­fore en­ter­ing the Gulf of Mex­ico near lat­i­tude 44° north, this cur­rent di­vides into two arms; its chief arm makes for the shores of Ire­land and Nor­way while the sec­ond flexes south­ward at the level of the Azores; then it hits the coast of Africa, sweeps in a long oval, and re­turns to the Caribbean Sea.</p>
				<p>Now then, this sec­ond arm—more ac­cu­rately, a col­lar—forms a ring of warm wa­ter around a sec­tion of cool, tran­quil, mo­tion­less ocean called the Sar­gasso Sea. This is an ac­tual lake in the open At­lantic, and the great cur­rent’s wa­ters take at least three years to cir­cle it.</p>
				<p>Prop­erly speak­ing, the Sar­gasso Sea cov­ers ev­ery sub­merged part of At­lantis. Cer­tain au­thors have even held that the many weeds strewn over this sea were torn loose from the prairies of that an­cient con­ti­nent. But it’s more likely that these grasses, al­gae, and fu­cus plants were car­ried off from the beaches of Europe and Amer­ica, then taken as far as this zone by the Gulf Stream. This is one of the rea­sons why Christo­pher Colum­bus as­sumed the ex­is­tence of a New World. When the ships of that bold in­ves­ti­ga­tor ar­rived in the Sar­gasso Sea, they had great dif­fi­culty nav­i­gat­ing in the midst of these weeds, which, much to their crews’ dis­may, slowed them down to a halt; and they wasted three long weeks cross­ing this sec­tor.</p>
				<p>Such was the re­gion our <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i> was vis­it­ing just then: a gen­uine prairie, a tightly wo­ven car­pet of al­gae, gulfweed, and blad­der wrack so dense and com­pact a craft’s stem­post couldn’t tear through it with­out dif­fi­culty. Ac­cord­ingly, not want­ing to en­tan­gle his pro­pel­ler in this weed-choked mass, Cap­tain Nemo stayed at a depth some me­ters be­low the sur­face of the waves.</p>
				<p>The name Sar­gasso comes from the Span­ish word <i lang="es" xml:lang="es">sargazo</i>, mean­ing gulfweed. This gulfweed, the swim­ming gulfweed or berry car­rier, is the chief sub­stance mak­ing up this im­mense shoal. And here’s why these wa­ter plants col­lect in this placid At­lantic basin, ac­cord­ing to the ex­pert on the sub­ject, Com­man­der Maury, au­thor of <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">The Phys­i­cal Geog­ra­phy of the Sea</i>.</p>
				<p>The ex­pla­na­tion he gives seems to en­tail a set of con­di­tions that ev­ery­body knows: “Now,” Maury says, “if bits of cork or chaff, or any float­ing sub­stance, be put into a basin, and a cir­cu­lar mo­tion be given to the wa­ter, all the light sub­stances will be found crowd­ing to­gether near the cen­ter of the pool, where there is the least mo­tion. Just such a basin is the At­lantic Ocean to the Gulf Stream, and the Sar­gasso Sea is the cen­ter of the whirl.”</p>
				<p>I share Maury’s view, and I was able to study the phe­nom­e­non in this ex­clu­sive set­ting where ships rarely go. Above us, hud­dled among the brown weeds, there floated ob­jects orig­i­nat­ing from all over: tree trunks ripped from the Rocky Moun­tains or the An­des and sent float­ing down the Ama­zon or the Mis­sis­sippi, nu­mer­ous pieces of wreck­age, rem­nants of keels or un­der­sides, bul­warks staved in and so weighed down with seashells and bar­na­cles, they couldn’t rise to the sur­face of the ocean. And the pass­ing years will some­day bear out Maury’s other view that by col­lect­ing in this way over the cen­turies, these sub­stances will be turned to stone by the ac­tion of the wa­ters and will then form in­ex­haustible coal­fields. Valu­able re­serves pre­pared by farsee­ing na­ture for that time when man will have ex­hausted his mines on the con­ti­nents.</p>
				<p>In the midst of this hope­lessly tan­gled fab­ric of weeds and fu­cus plants, I noted some de­light­ful pink-col­ored, star-shaped al­cyon coral, sea anemone trail­ing the long tresses of their ten­ta­cles, some green, red, and blue jel­ly­fish, and es­pe­cially those big rhi­zos­tome jel­ly­fish that Cu­vier de­scribed, whose bluish para­sols are trimmed with vi­o­let fes­toons.</p>
				<p>We spent the whole day of Fe­bru­ary 22 in the Sar­gasso Sea, where fish that dote on ma­rine plants and crus­taceans find plenty to eat. The next day the ocean re­sumed its usual ap­pear­ance.</p>
				<p>From this mo­ment on, for nine­teen days from Fe­bru­ary 23 to March 12, the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i> stayed in the mid­dle of the At­lantic, hus­tling us along at a con­stant speed of 100 leagues ev­ery twenty-four hours. It was ob­vi­ous that Cap­tain Nemo wanted to carry out his un­der­wa­ter pro­gram, and I had no doubt that he in­tended, af­ter dou­bling Cape Horn, to re­turn to the Pa­cific South Seas.</p>
				<p>So Ned Land had good rea­son to worry. In these wide seas empty of is­lands, it was no longer fea­si­ble to jump ship. Nor did we have any way to counter Cap­tain Nemo’s whims. We had no choice but to ac­qui­esce; but if we couldn’t at­tain our end through force or cun­ning, I liked to think we might achieve it through per­sua­sion. Once this voy­age was over, might not Cap­tain Nemo con­sent to set us free in re­turn for our prom­ise never to re­veal his ex­is­tence? Our word of honor, which we sin­cerely would have kept. How­ever, this del­i­cate ques­tion would have to be ne­go­ti­ated with the cap­tain. But how would he re­ceive our de­mands for free­dom? At the very out­set and in no un­cer­tain terms, hadn’t he de­clared that the se­cret of his life re­quired that we be per­ma­nently im­pris­oned on board the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i>? Wouldn’t he see my four-month si­lence as a tacit ac­cep­tance of this sit­u­a­tion? Would my re­turn­ing to this sub­ject arouse sus­pi­cions that could jeop­ar­dize our es­cape plans, if we had promis­ing cir­cum­stances for try­ing again later on? I weighed all these con­sid­er­a­tions, turned them over in my mind, sub­mit­ted them to Con­seil, but he was as baf­fled as I was. In short, al­though I’m not eas­ily dis­cour­aged, I re­al­ized that my chances of ever see­ing my fel­low men again were shrink­ing by the day, es­pe­cially at a time when Cap­tain Nemo was reck­lessly rac­ing to­ward the south At­lantic!</p>
				<p>Dur­ing those nine­teen days just men­tioned, no unique in­ci­dents dis­tin­guished our voy­age. I saw lit­tle of the cap­tain. He was at work. In the li­brary I of­ten found books he had left open, es­pe­cially books on nat­u­ral his­tory. He had thumbed through my work on the great ocean depths, and the mar­gins were cov­ered with his notes, which some­times con­tra­dicted my the­o­ries and for­mu­la­tions. But the cap­tain re­mained con­tent with this method of re­fin­ing my work, and he rarely dis­cussed it with me. Some­times I heard melan­choly sounds re­ver­ber­at­ing from the or­gan, which he played very ex­pres­sively, but only at night in the midst of the most se­cre­tive dark­ness, while the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i> slum­bered in the wilder­ness of the ocean.</p>
				<p>Dur­ing this part of our voy­age, we nav­i­gated on the sur­face of the waves for en­tire days. The sea was nearly de­serted. A few sail­ing ships, laden for the East Indies, were head­ing to­ward the Cape of Good Hope. One day we were chased by the long­boats of a whal­ing ves­sel, which un­doubt­edly viewed us as some enor­mous baleen whale of great value. But Cap­tain Nemo didn’t want these gal­lant gen­tle­men wast­ing their time and en­ergy, so he ended the hunt by div­ing be­neath the wa­ters. This in­ci­dent seemed to fas­ci­nate Ned Land in­tensely. I’m sure the Cana­dian was sorry that these fish­er­men couldn’t har­poon our sheet-iron cetacean and mor­tally wound it.</p>
				<p>Dur­ing this pe­riod the fish Con­seil and I ob­served dif­fered lit­tle from those we had al­ready stud­ied in other lat­i­tudes. Chief among them were spec­i­mens of that dread­ful car­ti­lagi­nous genus that’s di­vided into three sub­gen­era num­ber­ing at least thirty-two species: striped sharks five me­ters long, the head squat and wider than the body, the cau­dal fin curved, the back with seven big, black, par­al­lel lines run­ning length­wise; then per­lon sharks, ash gray, pierced with seven gill open­ings, fur­nished with a sin­gle dor­sal fin placed al­most ex­actly in the mid­dle of the body.</p>
				<p>Some big dog­fish also passed by, a vo­ra­cious species of shark if there ever was one. With some jus­tice, fish­er­men’s yarns aren’t to be trusted, but here’s what a few of them re­late. In­side the corpse of one of these an­i­mals there were found a buf­falo head and a whole calf; in an­other, two tuna and a sailor in uni­form; in yet an­other, a sol­dier with his saber; in an­other, fi­nally, a horse with its rider. In can­dor, none of these sounds like di­vinely in­spired truth. But the fact re­mains that not a sin­gle dog­fish let it­self get caught in the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i>’s nets, so I can’t vouch for their vo­rac­ity.</p>
				<p>Schools of el­e­gant, play­ful dol­phin swam along­side for en­tire days. They went in groups of five or six, hunt­ing in packs like wolves over the coun­try­side; more­over, they’re just as vo­ra­cious as dog­fish, if I can be­lieve a cer­tain Copen­hagen pro­fes­sor who says that from one dol­phin’s stom­ach, he re­moved thir­teen por­poises and fif­teen seals. True, it was a killer whale, be­long­ing to the big­gest known species, whose length some­times ex­ceeds twenty-four feet. The fam­ily <i epub:type="z3998:taxonomy">Del­phinia</i> num­bers ten gen­era, and the dol­phins I saw were akin to the genus <i epub:type="z3998:taxonomy">Del­phi­norhynchus</i>, re­mark­able for an ex­tremely nar­row muz­zle four times as long as the cra­nium. Mea­sur­ing three me­ters, their bod­ies were black on top, un­der­neath a pink­ish white strewn with small, very scat­tered spots.</p>
				<p>From these seas I’ll also men­tion some un­usual spec­i­mens of croak­ers, fish from the or­der <i epub:type="z3998:taxonomy">Acan­thoptery­gia</i>, fam­ily <i epub:type="z3998:taxonomy">Scienidea</i>. Some au­thors—more artis­tic than sci­en­tific—claim that these fish are melo­di­ous singers, that their voices in uni­son put on con­certs un­matched by hu­man cho­ris­ters. I don’t say nay, but to my re­gret these croak­ers didn’t ser­e­nade us as we passed.</p>
				<p>Fi­nally, to con­clude, Con­seil clas­si­fied a large num­ber of fly­ing fish. Noth­ing could have made a more un­usual sight than the mar­velous tim­ing with which dol­phins hunt these fish. What­ever the range of its flight, how­ever eva­sive its tra­jec­tory (even up and over the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i>), the hap­less fly­ing fish al­ways found a dol­phin to wel­come it with open mouth. Th­ese were ei­ther fly­ing gurnards or kite­like sea robins, whose lips glowed in the dark, at night scrawl­ing fiery streaks in the air be­fore plung­ing into the murky wa­ters like so many shoot­ing stars.</p>
				<p>Our nav­i­gat­ing con­tin­ued un­der these con­di­tions un­til March 13. That day the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i> was put to work in some depth-sound­ing ex­per­i­ments that fas­ci­nated me deeply.</p>
				<p>By then we had fared nearly 13,000 leagues from our start­ing point in the Pa­cific high seas. Our po­si­tion fix placed us in lat­i­tude 45° 37′ south and lon­gi­tude 37° 53′ west. Th­ese were the same wa­ter­ways where Cap­tain Den­ham, aboard the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Her­ald</i>, payed out 14,000 me­ters of sound­ing line with­out find­ing bot­tom. It was here too that Lieu­tenant Parker, aboard the Amer­i­can frigate <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Congress</i>, was un­able to reach the un­der­wa­ter soil at 15,149 me­ters.</p>
				<p>Cap­tain Nemo de­cided to take his <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i> down to the low­est depths in or­der to dou­ble-check these dif­fer­ent sound­ings. I got ready to record the re­sults of this ex­per­i­ment. The pan­els in the lounge opened, and ma­neu­vers be­gan for reach­ing those strata so prodi­giously far re­moved.</p>
				<p>It was ap­par­ently con­sid­ered out of the ques­tion to dive by fill­ing the bal­last tanks. Per­haps they wouldn’t suf­fi­ciently in­crease the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i>’s spe­cific grav­ity. More­over, in or­der to come back up, it would be nec­es­sary to ex­pel the ex­cess wa­ter, and our pumps might not have been strong enough to over­come the out­side pres­sure.</p>
				<p>Cap­tain Nemo de­cided to make for the ocean floor by sub­merg­ing on an ap­pro­pri­ately grad­ual di­ag­o­nal with the help of his side fins, which were set at a 45° an­gle to the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i>’s wa­ter­line. Then the pro­pel­ler was brought to its max­i­mum speed, and its four blades churned the waves with in­de­scrib­able vi­o­lence.</p>
				<p>Un­der this pow­er­ful thrust the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i>’s hull quiv­ered like a res­onat­ing chord, and the ship sank steadily un­der the wa­ters. Sta­tioned in the lounge, the cap­tain and I watched the nee­dle swerv­ing swiftly over the pres­sure gauge. Soon we had gone be­low the liv­able zone where most fish re­side. Some of these an­i­mals can thrive only at the sur­face of seas or rivers, but a mi­nor­ity can dwell at fairly great depths. Among the lat­ter I ob­served a species of dog­fish called the cow shark that’s equipped with six res­pi­ra­tory slits, the tele­scope fish with its enor­mous eyes, the ar­mored gurnard with gray tho­racic fins plus black pec­toral fins and a breast­plate pro­tected by pale red slabs of bone, then fi­nally the grenadier, liv­ing at a depth of 1,200 me­ters, by that point tol­er­at­ing a pres­sure of 120 at­mos­pheres.</p>
				<p>I asked Cap­tain Nemo if he had ob­served any fish at more con­sid­er­able depths.</p>
				<p>“Fish? Rarely!” he an­swered me. “But given the cur­rent state of ma­rine sci­ence, who are we to pre­sume, what do we re­ally know of these depths?”</p>
				<p>“Just this, cap­tain. In go­ing to­ward the ocean’s lower strata, we know that veg­etable life dis­ap­pears more quickly than an­i­mal life. We know that mov­ing crea­tures can still be en­coun­tered where wa­ter plants no longer grow. We know that oys­ters and pil­grim scal­lops live in 2,000 me­ters of wa­ter, and that Ad­mi­ral McClin­tock, Eng­land’s hero of the po­lar seas, pulled in a live sea star from a depth of 2,500 me­ters. We know that the crew of the Royal Navy’s <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Bull­dog</i> fished up a starfish from 2,620 fath­oms, hence from a depth of more than one ver­ti­cal league. Would you still say, Cap­tain Nemo, that we re­ally know noth­ing?”</p>
				<p>“No, pro­fes­sor,” the cap­tain replied, “I wouldn’t be so dis­cour­te­ous. Yet I’ll ask you to ex­plain how these crea­tures can live at such depths?”</p>
				<p>“I ex­plain it on two grounds,” I replied. “In the first place, be­cause ver­ti­cal cur­rents, which are caused by dif­fer­ences in the wa­ter’s salin­ity and den­sity, can pro­duce enough mo­tion to sus­tain the rudi­men­tary life­styles of sea lilies and starfish.”</p>
				<p>“True,” the cap­tain put in.</p>
				<p>“In the sec­ond place, be­cause oxy­gen is the ba­sis of life, and we know that the amount of oxy­gen dis­solved in salt wa­ter in­creases rather than de­creases with depth, that the pres­sure in these lower strata helps to con­cen­trate their oxy­gen con­tent.”</p>
				<p>“Oho! We know that, do we?” Cap­tain Nemo replied in a tone of mild sur­prise. “Well, pro­fes­sor, we have good rea­son to know it be­cause it’s the truth. I might add, in fact, that the air blad­ders of fish con­tain more ni­tro­gen than oxy­gen when these an­i­mals are caught at the sur­face of the wa­ter, and con­versely, more oxy­gen than ni­tro­gen when they’re pulled up from the lower depths. Which bears out your for­mu­la­tion. But let’s con­tinue our ob­ser­va­tions.”</p>
				<p>My eyes flew back to the pres­sure gauge. The in­stru­ment in­di­cated a depth of 6,000 me­ters. Our sub­mer­gence had been go­ing on for an hour. The <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i> slid down­ward on its slant­ing fins, still sink­ing. Th­ese de­serted wa­ters were won­der­fully clear, with a trans­parency im­pos­si­ble to con­vey. An hour later we were at 13,000 me­ters—about three and a quar­ter ver­ti­cal leagues—and the ocean floor was nowhere in sight.</p>
				<p>How­ever, at 14,000 me­ters I saw black­ish peaks ris­ing in the midst of the wa­ters. But these sum­mits could have be­longed to moun­tains as high or even higher than the Hi­malayas or Mt. Blanc, and the ex­tent of these depths re­mained in­cal­cu­la­ble.</p>
				<p>De­spite the pow­er­ful pres­sures it was un­der­go­ing, the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i> sank still deeper. I could feel its sheet-iron plates trem­bling down to their riv­eted joins; metal bars arched; bulk­heads groaned; the lounge win­dows seemed to be warp­ing in­ward un­der the wa­ter’s pres­sure. And this whole sturdy mech­a­nism would surely have given way, if, as its cap­tain had said, it weren’t ca­pa­ble of re­sist­ing like a solid block.</p>
				<p>While graz­ing these rocky slopes lost un­der the wa­ters, I still spot­ted some seashells, tube worms, lively an­nelid worms from the genus <i epub:type="z3998:taxonomy">Spiror­bis</i>, and cer­tain starfish spec­i­mens.</p>
				<p>But soon these last rep­re­sen­ta­tives of an­i­mal life van­ished, and three ver­ti­cal leagues down, the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i> passed be­low the lim­its of un­der­wa­ter ex­is­tence just as an air bal­loon rises above the breath­able zones in the sky. We reached a depth of 16,000 me­ters—four ver­ti­cal leagues—and by then the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i>’s plat­ing was tol­er­at­ing a pres­sure of 1,600 at­mos­pheres, in other words, 1,600 kilo­grams per each square cen­time­ter on its sur­face!</p>
				<p>“What an ex­pe­ri­ence!” I ex­claimed. “Trav­el­ing these deep re­gions where no man has ever ven­tured be­fore! Look, cap­tain! Look at these mag­nif­i­cent rocks, these un­in­hab­ited caves, these last global haunts where life is no longer pos­si­ble! What un­heard-of scenery, and why are we re­duced to pre­serv­ing it only as a mem­ory?”</p>
				<p>“Would you like,” Cap­tain Nemo asked me, “to bring back more than just a mem­ory?”</p>
				<p>“What do you mean?”</p>
				<p>“I mean that noth­ing could be eas­ier than tak­ing a pho­to­graph of this un­der­wa­ter re­gion!”</p>
				<p>Be­fore I had time to ex­press the sur­prise this new propo­si­tion caused me, a cam­era was car­ried into the lounge at Cap­tain Nemo’s re­quest. The liq­uid set­ting, elec­tri­cally lit, un­folded with per­fect clar­ity through the wide-open pan­els. No shad­ows, no blurs, thanks to our ar­ti­fi­cial light. Not even sun­shine could have been bet­ter for our pur­poses. With the thrust of its pro­pel­ler curbed by the slant of its fins, the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i> stood still. The cam­era was aimed at the scenery on the ocean floor, and in a few sec­onds we had a per­fect neg­a­tive.</p>
				<p>I at­tach a print of the pos­i­tive. In it you can view these pri­mor­dial rocks that have never seen the light of day, this nether gran­ite that forms the pow­er­ful foun­da­tion of our globe, the deep caves cut into the stony mass, the out­lines of in­com­pa­ra­ble dis­tinct­ness whose far edges stand out in black as if from the brush of cer­tain Flem­ish painters. In the dis­tance is a moun­tain­ous hori­zon, a won­drously un­du­lat­ing line that makes up the back­ground of this land­scape. The gen­eral ef­fect of these smooth rocks is in­de­scrib­able: black, pol­ished, with­out moss or other blem­ish, carved into strange shapes, sit­ting firmly on a car­pet of sand that sparkled be­neath our streams of elec­tric light.</p>
				<p>Mean­while, his pho­to­graphic op­er­a­tions over, Cap­tain Nemo told me:</p>
				<p>“Let’s go back up, pro­fes­sor. We mustn’t push our luck and ex­pose the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i> too long to these pres­sures.”</p>
				<p>“Let’s go back up!” I replied.</p>
				<p>“Hold on tight.”</p>
				<p>Be­fore I had time to re­al­ize why the cap­tain made this rec­om­men­da­tion, I was hurled to the car­pet.</p>
				<p>Its fins set ver­ti­cally, its pro­pel­ler thrown in gear at the cap­tain’s sig­nal, the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i> rose with light­ning speed, shoot­ing up­ward like an air bal­loon into the sky. Vi­brat­ing res­o­nantly, it knifed through the wa­tery mass. Not a sin­gle de­tail was vis­i­ble. In four min­utes it had cleared the four ver­ti­cal leagues sep­a­rat­ing it from the sur­face of the ocean, and af­ter emerg­ing like a fly­ing fish, it fell back into the sea, mak­ing the waves leap to prodi­gious heights.</p>
			</section>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
