<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="en-US" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: http://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Chapter 4</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="part-2" epub:type="part">
			<section id="chapter-2-4" epub:type="chapter">
				<h3 epub:type="title">
					<span epub:type="z3998:roman">IV</span>
					<span class="epub-type-subtitle" epub:type="subtitle">The Red Sea</span>
				</h3>
				<p>Dur­ing the day of Jan­uary 29, the is­land of Cey­lon dis­ap­peared be­low the hori­zon, and at a speed of twenty miles per hour, the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i> glided into the labyrinthine chan­nels that sep­a­rate the Mal­dive and Lac­cadive Is­lands. It like­wise hugged Kil­tan Is­land, a shore of madreporic ori­gin dis­cov­ered by Vasco da Gama in 1499 and one of nine­teen chief is­lands in the is­land group of the Lac­cadives, lo­cated be­tween lat­i­tude 10° and 14° 30′ north, and be­tween lon­gi­tude 50° 72′ and 69° east.</p>
				<p>By then we had fared 16,220 miles, or 7,500 leagues, from our start­ing point in the seas of Ja­pan.</p>
				<p>The next day, Jan­uary 30, when the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i> rose to the sur­face of the ocean, there was no more land in sight. Set­ting its course to the north-north­west, the ship headed to­ward the Gulf of Oman, carved out be­tween Ara­bia and the In­dian penin­sula and pro­vid­ing ac­cess to the Per­sian Gulf.</p>
				<p>This was ob­vi­ously a blind al­ley with no pos­si­ble out­let. So where was Cap­tain Nemo tak­ing us? I was un­able to say. Which didn’t sat­isfy the Cana­dian, who that day asked me where we were go­ing.</p>
				<p>“We’re go­ing, Mr. Ned, where the cap­tain’s fancy takes us.”</p>
				<p>“His fancy,” the Cana­dian replied, “won’t take us very far. The Per­sian Gulf has no out­let, and if we en­ter those wa­ters, it won’t be long be­fore we re­turn in our tracks.”</p>
				<p>“All right, we’ll re­turn, Mr. Land, and af­ter the Per­sian Gulf, if the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i> wants to visit the Red Sea, the Strait of Bab el Man­deb is still there to let us in!”</p>
				<p>“I don’t have to tell you, sir,” Ned Land replied, “that the Red Sea is just as land­locked as the gulf, since the Isth­mus of Suez hasn’t been cut all the way through yet; and even if it was, a boat as se­cre­tive as ours wouldn’t risk a canal in­ter­sected with locks. So the Red Sea won’t be our way back to Europe ei­ther.”</p>
				<p>“But I didn’t say we’d re­turn to Europe.”</p>
				<p>“What do you fig­ure, then?”</p>
				<p>“I fig­ure that af­ter vis­it­ing these un­usual wa­ter­ways of Ara­bia and Egypt, the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i> will go back down to the In­dian Ocean, per­haps through Mozam­bique Chan­nel, per­haps off the Mas­carene Is­lands, and then make for the Cape of Good Hope.”</p>
				<p>“And once we’re at the Cape of Good Hope?” the Cana­dian asked with typ­i­cal per­sis­tence.</p>
				<p>“Well then, we’ll en­ter that At­lantic Ocean with which we aren’t yet fa­mil­iar. What’s wrong, Ned my friend? Are you tired of this voy­age un­der the seas? Are you bored with the con­stantly chang­ing sight of these un­der­wa­ter won­ders? Speak­ing for my­self, I’ll be ex­tremely dis­tressed to see the end of a voy­age so few men will ever have a chance to make.”</p>
				<p>“But don’t you re­al­ize, Pro­fes­sor Aron­nax,” the Cana­dian replied, “that soon we’ll have been im­pris­oned for three whole months aboard this <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i>?”</p>
				<p>“No, Ned, I didn’t re­al­ize it, I don’t want to re­al­ize it, and I don’t keep track of ev­ery day and ev­ery hour.”</p>
				<p>“But when will it be over?”</p>
				<p>“In its ap­pointed time. Mean­while there’s noth­ing we can do about it, and our dis­cus­sions are fu­tile. My gal­lant Ned, if you come and tell me, ‘A chance to es­cape is avail­able to us,’ then I’ll dis­cuss it with you. But that isn’t the case, and in all hon­esty, I don’t think Cap­tain Nemo ever ven­tures into Euro­pean seas.”</p>
				<p>This short di­a­logue re­veals that in my ma­nia for the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i>, I was turn­ing into the spit­ting im­age of its com­man­der.</p>
				<p>As for Ned Land, he ended our talk in his best speechi­fy­ing style: “That’s all fine and dandy. But in my hum­ble opin­ion, a life in jail is a life with­out joy.”</p>
				<p>For four days un­til Fe­bru­ary 3, the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i> in­spected the Gulf of Oman at var­i­ous speeds and depths. It seemed to be trav­el­ing at ran­dom, as if hes­i­tat­ing over which course to fol­low, but it never crossed the Tropic of Cancer.</p>
				<p>After leav­ing this gulf we raised Mus­cat for an in­stant, the most im­por­tant town in the coun­try of Oman. I mar­veled at its strange ap­pear­ance in the midst of the black rocks sur­round­ing it, against which the white of its houses and forts stood out sharply. I spot­ted the rounded domes of its mosques, the el­e­gant tips of its minarets, and its fresh, leafy ter­races. But it was only a fleet­ing vi­sion, and the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i> soon sank be­neath the dark waves of these wa­ter­ways.</p>
				<p>Then our ship went along at a dis­tance of six miles from the Ara­bic coasts of Mahra and Hadhra­maut, their un­du­lat­ing lines of moun­tains re­lieved by a few an­cient ru­ins. On Fe­bru­ary 5 we fi­nally put into the Gulf of Aden, a gen­uine fun­nel stuck into the neck of Bab el Man­deb and bot­tling these In­dian wa­ters in the Red Sea.</p>
				<p>On Fe­bru­ary 6 the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i> cruised in sight of the city of Aden, perched on a promon­tory con­nected to the con­ti­nent by a nar­row isth­mus, a sort of in­ac­ces­si­ble Gi­bral­tar whose for­ti­fi­ca­tions the English re­built af­ter cap­tur­ing it in 1839. I glimpsed the oc­tag­o­nal minarets of this town, which used to be one of the wealth­i­est, busiest com­mer­cial cen­ters along this coast, as the Arab his­to­rian Idrisi tells it.</p>
				<p>I was con­vinced that when Cap­tain Nemo reached this point, he would back out again; but I was mis­taken, and much to my sur­prise, he did noth­ing of the sort.</p>
				<p>The next day, Fe­bru­ary 7, we en­tered the Strait of Bab el Man­deb, whose name means “Gate of Tears” in the Ara­bic lan­guage. Twenty miles wide, it’s only fifty-two kilo­me­ters long, and with the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i> launched at full speed, clear­ing it was the work of barely an hour. But I didn’t see a thing, not even Perim Is­land where the Bri­tish gov­ern­ment built for­ti­fi­ca­tions to strengthen Aden’s po­si­tion. There were many English and French steam­ers plow­ing this nar­row pas­sage­way, lin­ers go­ing from Suez to Bom­bay, Cal­cutta, Mel­bourne, Réu­nion Is­land, and Mau­ri­tius; far too much traf­fic for the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i> to make an ap­pear­ance on the sur­face. So it wisely stayed in mid­wa­ter.</p>
				<p>Fi­nally, at noon, we were plow­ing the waves of the Red Sea.</p>
				<p>The Red Sea: that great lake so fa­mous in bib­li­cal tra­di­tions, sel­dom re­plen­ished by rains, fed by no im­por­tant rivers, con­tin­u­ally drained by a high rate of evap­o­ra­tion, its wa­ter level drop­ping a me­ter and a half ev­ery year! If it were fully land­locked like a lake, this odd gulf might dry up com­pletely; on this score it’s in­fe­rior to its neigh­bors, the Caspian Sea and the Dead Sea, whose lev­els lower only to the point where their evap­o­ra­tion ex­actly equals the amounts of wa­ter they take to their hearts.</p>
				<p>This Red Sea is 2,600 kilo­me­ters long with an av­er­age width of 240. In the days of the Ptolemies and the Ro­man em­per­ors, it was a great com­mer­cial artery for the world, and when its isth­mus has been cut through, it will com­pletely re­gain that by­gone im­por­tance that the Suez rail­ways have al­ready brought back in part.</p>
				<p>I would not even at­tempt to un­der­stand the whim that in­duced Cap­tain Nemo to take us into this gulf. But I whole­heart­edly ap­proved of the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i>’s en­ter­ing it. It adopted a medium pace, some­times stay­ing on the sur­face, some­times div­ing to avoid some ship, and so I could ob­serve both the in­side and top­side of this highly un­usual sea.</p>
				<p>On Fe­bru­ary 8, as early as the first hours of day­light, Mocha ap­peared be­fore us: a town now in ru­ins, whose walls would col­lapse at the mere sound of a can­non, and which shel­ters a few leafy date trees here and there. This once-im­por­tant city used to con­tain six pub­lic mar­ket­places plus twenty-six mosques, and its walls, pro­tected by four­teen forts, fash­ioned a three-kilo­me­ter gir­dle around it.</p>
				<p>Then the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i> drew near the beaches of Africa, where the sea is con­sid­er­ably deeper. There, through the open pan­els and in a mid­wa­ter of crys­tal clar­ity, our ship en­abled us to study won­der­ful bushes of shin­ing coral and huge chunks of rock wrapped in splen­did green furs of al­gae and fu­cus. What an in­de­scrib­able sight, and what a va­ri­ety of set­tings and scenery where these reefs and vol­canic is­lands lev­eled off by the Libyan coast! But soon the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i> hugged the east­ern shore where these tree forms ap­peared in all their glory. This was off the coast of Ti­hama, and there such zoophyte dis­plays not only flour­ished be­low sea level but they also fash­ioned pic­turesque net­works that un­reeled as high as ten fath­oms above it; the lat­ter were more whim­si­cal but less col­or­ful than the for­mer, which kept their bloom thanks to the moist vi­tal­ity of the wa­ters.</p>
				<p>How many de­light­ful hours I spent in this way at the lounge win­dow! How many new spec­i­mens of un­der­wa­ter flora and fauna I mar­veled at be­neath the light of our elec­tric bea­con! Mush­room-shaped fun­gus coral, some slate-col­ored sea anemone in­clud­ing the species <i epub:type="z3998:taxonomy">Tha­las­sianthus aster</i> among oth­ers, or­gan-pipe coral ar­ranged like flutes and just beg­ging for a puff from the god Pan, shells unique to this sea that dwell in madreporic cav­i­ties and whose bases are twisted into squat spi­rals, and fi­nally a thou­sand sam­ples of a poly­pary I hadn’t ob­served un­til then: the com­mon sponge.</p>
				<p>First di­vi­sion in the polyp group, the class <i epub:type="z3998:taxonomy">Spon­gia­ria</i> has been cre­ated by sci­en­tists pre­cisely for this un­usual ex­hibit whose use­ful­ness is be­yond dis­pute. The sponge is def­i­nitely not a plant, as some nat­u­ral­ists still be­lieve, but an an­i­mal of the low­est or­der, a poly­pary in­fe­rior even to coral. Its an­i­mal na­ture isn’t in doubt, and we can’t ac­cept even the views of the an­cients, who re­garded it as half­way be­tween plant and an­i­mal. But I must say that nat­u­ral­ists are not in agree­ment on the struc­tural mode of sponges. For some it’s a poly­pary, and for oth­ers, such as Pro­fes­sor Milne-Ed­wards, it’s a sin­gle, soli­tary in­di­vid­ual.</p>
				<p>The class <i epub:type="z3998:taxonomy">Spon­gia­ria</i> con­tains about 300 species that are en­coun­tered in a large num­ber of seas and even in cer­tain streams, where they’ve been given the name fresh­wa­ter sponges. But their wa­ters of choice are the Red Sea and the Mediter­ranean near the Greek Is­lands or the coast of Syria. Th­ese wa­ters wit­ness the re­pro­duc­tion and growth of soft, del­i­cate bath sponges whose prices run as high as 150 francs apiece: the yel­low sponge from Syria, the horn sponge from Bar­bary, etc. But since I had no hope of study­ing these zoophytes in the sea­ports of the Le­vant, from which we were sep­a­rated by the in­su­per­a­ble Isth­mus of Suez, I had to be con­tent with ob­serv­ing them in the wa­ters of the Red Sea.</p>
				<p>So I called Con­seil to my side, while at an av­er­age depth of eight to nine me­ters, the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i> slowly skimmed ev­ery beau­ti­ful rock on the east­erly coast.</p>
				<p>There sponges grew in ev­ery shape, glob­u­lar, stalk­like, leaflike, fin­ger­like. With rea­son­able ac­cu­racy, they lived up to their nick­names of bas­ket sponges, chal­ice sponges, distaff sponges, elkhorn sponges, lion’s paws, pea­cock’s tails, and Nep­tune’s gloves—des­ig­na­tions be­stowed on them by fish­er­men, more po­et­i­cally in­clined than sci­en­tists. A gelati­nous, semi­fluid sub­stance coated the fi­brous tis­sue of these sponges, and from this tis­sue there es­caped a steady trickle of wa­ter that, af­ter car­ry­ing sus­te­nance to each cell, was be­ing ex­pelled by a con­tract­ing move­ment. This jel­ly­like sub­stance dis­ap­pears when the polyp dies, emit­ting am­mo­nia as it rots. Fi­nally noth­ing re­mains but the fibers, ei­ther gelati­nous or made of horn, that con­sti­tute your house­hold sponge, which takes on a rus­set hue and is used for var­i­ous tasks de­pend­ing on its de­gree of elas­tic­ity, per­me­abil­ity, or re­sis­tance to sat­u­ra­tion.</p>
				<p>Th­ese poly­paries were stick­ing to rocks, shells of mol­lusks, and even the stalks of wa­ter plants. They adorned the small­est crevices, some sprawl­ing, oth­ers stand­ing or hang­ing like coral out­growths. I told Con­seil that sponges are fished up in two ways, ei­ther by drag­net or by hand. The lat­ter method calls for the ser­vices of a diver, but it’s prefer­able be­cause it spares the poly­pary’s tis­sue, leav­ing it with a much higher mar­ket value.</p>
				<p>Other zoophytes swarm­ing near the sponges con­sisted chiefly of a very el­e­gant species of jel­ly­fish; mol­lusks were rep­re­sented by va­ri­eties of squid that, ac­cord­ing to Pro­fes­sor Or­bigny, are unique to the Red Sea; and rep­tiles by vir­gata tur­tles be­long­ing to the genus <i epub:type="z3998:taxonomy">Ch­elo­nia</i>, which fur­nished our ta­ble with a dainty but whole­some dish.</p>
				<p>As for fish, they were nu­mer­ous and of­ten re­mark­able. Here are the ones that the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i>’s nets most fre­quently hauled on board: rays, in­clud­ing spot­ted rays that were oval in shape and brick red in color, their bod­ies strewn with er­ratic blue speck­les and iden­ti­fi­able by their jagged dou­ble stings, sil­ver-backed skates, com­mon stingrays with stip­pled tails, but­ter­fly rays that looked like huge two-me­ter cloaks flap­ping at mid­depth, tooth­less gui­tarfish that were a type of car­ti­lagi­nous fish closer to the shark, trunk­fish known as drom­e­daries that were one and a half feet long and had humps end­ing in back­ward-curv­ing stings, ser­pen­tine moray eels with sil­ver tails and bluish backs plus brown pec­torals trimmed in gray pip­ing, a species of but­ter­fish called the fi­a­tola decked out in thin gold stripes and the three col­ors of the French flag, Mon­tague blennies four decime­ters long, su­perb jacks hand­somely em­bel­lished by seven black cross­wise streaks with blue and yel­low fins plus gold and sil­ver scales, snooks, stan­dard mul­let with yel­low heads, par­rot­fish, wrasse, trig­ger­fish, go­b­ies, etc., plus a thou­sand other fish com­mon to the oceans we had al­ready crossed.</p>
				<p>On Fe­bru­ary 9 the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i> cruised in the widest part of the Red Sea, mea­sur­ing 190 miles straight across from Suakin on the west coast to Qun­fidha on the east coast.</p>
				<p>At noon that day af­ter our po­si­tion fix, Cap­tain Nemo climbed onto the plat­form, where I hap­pened to be. I vowed not to let him go be­low again with­out at least sound­ing him out on his fu­ture plans. As soon as he saw me, he came over, gra­ciously of­fered me a cigar, and said to me:</p>
				<p>“Well, pro­fes­sor, are you pleased with this Red Sea? Have you seen enough of its hid­den won­ders, its fish and zoophytes, its gar­dens of sponges and forests of coral? Have you glimpsed the towns built on its shores?”</p>
				<p>“Yes, Cap­tain Nemo,” I replied, “and the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i> is won­der­fully suited to this whole sur­vey. Ah, it’s a clever boat!”</p>
				<p>“Yes, sir, clever, dar­ing, and in­vul­ner­a­ble! It fears nei­ther the Red Sea’s dread­ful storms nor its cur­rents and reefs.”</p>
				<p>“In­deed,” I said, “this sea is men­tioned as one of the worst, and in the days of the an­cients, if I’m not mis­taken, it had an abom­inable rep­u­ta­tion.”</p>
				<p>“Thor­oughly abom­inable, Pro­fes­sor Aron­nax. The Greek and Latin his­to­ri­ans can find noth­ing to say in its fa­vor, and the Greek ge­og­ra­pher Strabo adds that it’s es­pe­cially rough dur­ing the rainy sea­son and the pe­riod of sum­mer pre­vail­ing winds. The Arab Idrisi, re­fer­ring to it by the name Gulf of Col­zoum, re­lates that ships per­ished in large num­bers on its sand­banks and that no one risked nav­i­gat­ing it by night. This, he claims, is a sea sub­ject to fear­ful hur­ri­canes, strewn with in­hos­pitable is­lands, and ‘with noth­ing good to of­fer,’ ei­ther on its sur­face or in its depths. As a mat­ter of fact, the same views can also be found in Ar­rian, Agath­archides, and Artemi­dorus.”</p>
				<p>“One can eas­ily see,” I an­swered, “that those his­to­ri­ans didn’t nav­i­gate aboard the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i>.”</p>
				<p>“In­deed,” the cap­tain replied with a smile, “and in this re­spect, the mod­erns aren’t much far­ther along than the an­cients. It took many cen­turies to dis­cover the me­chan­i­cal power of steam! Who knows whether we’ll see a sec­ond <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i> within the next 100 years! Progress is slow, Pro­fes­sor Aron­nax.”</p>
				<p>“It’s true,” I replied. “Your ship is a cen­tury ahead of its time, per­haps sev­eral cen­turies. It would be most un­for­tu­nate if such a se­cret were to die with its in­ven­tor!”</p>
				<p>Cap­tain Nemo did not re­ply. After some min­utes of si­lence:</p>
				<p>“We were dis­cussing,” he said, “the views of an­cient his­to­ri­ans on the dan­gers of nav­i­gat­ing this Red Sea?”</p>
				<p>“True,” I replied. “But weren’t their fears ex­ag­ger­ated?”</p>
				<p>“Yes and no, Pro­fes­sor Aron­nax,” an­swered Cap­tain Nemo, who seemed to know “his Red Sea” by heart. “To a mod­ern ship, well rigged, solidly con­structed, and in con­trol of its course thanks to obe­di­ent steam, some con­di­tions are no longer haz­ardous that of­fered all sorts of dan­gers to the ves­sels of the an­cients. Pic­ture those early nav­i­ga­tors ven­tur­ing forth in sail­boats built from planks lashed to­gether with palm-tree ropes, caulked with pow­dered resin, and coated with dog­fish grease. They didn’t even have in­stru­ments for tak­ing their bear­ings, they went by guess­work in the midst of cur­rents they barely knew. Un­der such con­di­tions, ship­wrecks had to be nu­mer­ous. But nowa­days steam­ers pro­vid­ing ser­vice be­tween Suez and the South Seas have noth­ing to fear from the fury of this gulf, de­spite the con­trary winds of its mon­soons. Their cap­tains and pas­sen­gers no longer pre­pare for de­par­ture with sac­ri­fices to pla­cate the gods, and af­ter re­turn­ing, they don’t traipse in wreaths and gold rib­bons to say thanks at the lo­cal tem­ple.”</p>
				<p>“Agreed,” I said. “And steam seems to have killed off all grat­i­tude in sea­men’s hearts. But since you seem to have made a spe­cial study of this sea, cap­tain, can you tell me how it got its name?”</p>
				<p>“Many ex­pla­na­tions ex­ist on the sub­ject, Pro­fes­sor Aron­nax. Would you like to hear the views of one chron­i­cler in the 14th cen­tury?”</p>
				<p>“Gladly.”</p>
				<p>“This fan­ci­ful fel­low claims the sea was given its name af­ter the cross­ing of the Is­raelites, when the Pharaoh per­ished in those waves that came to­gether again at Moses’ com­mand: To mark that mirac­u­lous se­quel, the sea turned a red with­out equal. Thus no other course would do but to name it for its hue.”</p>
				<p>“An artis­tic ex­pla­na­tion, Cap­tain Nemo,” I replied, “but I’m un­able to rest con­tent with it. So I’ll ask you for your own per­sonal views.”</p>
				<p>“Here they come. To my think­ing, Pro­fes­sor Aron­nax, this ‘Red Sea’ des­ig­na­tion must be re­garded as a trans­la­tion of the He­brew word <i lang="he" xml:lang="he">Edrom</i>, and if the an­cients gave it that name, it was be­cause of the unique color of its wa­ters.”</p>
				<p>“Un­til now, how­ever, I’ve seen only clear waves, with­out any unique hue.”</p>
				<p>“Surely, but as we move ahead to the far end of this gulf, you’ll note its odd ap­pear­ance. I re­call see­ing the bay of El Tur com­pletely red, like a lake of blood.”</p>
				<p>“And you at­tribute this color to the pres­ence of mi­cro­scopic al­gae?”</p>
				<p>“Yes. It’s a pur­plish, mu­cilagi­nous sub­stance pro­duced by those tiny buds known by the name <i epub:type="z3998:taxonomy">tri­chodesmia</i>, 40,000 of which are needed to oc­cupy the space of one square mil­lime­ter. Per­haps you’ll en­counter them when we reach El Tur.”</p>
				<p>“Hence, Cap­tain Nemo, this isn’t the first time you’ve gone through the Red Sea aboard the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i>?”</p>
				<p>“No, sir.”</p>
				<p>“Then, since you’ve al­ready men­tioned the cross­ing of the Is­raelites and the catas­tro­phe that be­fell the Egyp­tians, I would ask if you’ve ever dis­cov­ered any traces un­der the wa­ters of that great his­toric event?”</p>
				<p>“No, pro­fes­sor, and for an ex­cel­lent rea­son.”</p>
				<p>“What’s that?”</p>
				<p>“It’s be­cause that same lo­cal­ity where Moses crossed with all his peo­ple is now so clogged with sand, camels can barely get their legs wet. You can un­der­stand that my <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i> wouldn’t have enough wa­ter for it­self.”</p>
				<p>“And that lo­cal­ity is … ?” I asked.</p>
				<p>“That lo­cal­ity lies a lit­tle above Suez in a sound that used to form a deep es­tu­ary when the Red Sea stretched as far as the Bit­ter Lakes. Now, whether or not their cross­ing was lit­er­ally mirac­u­lous, the Is­raelites did cross there in re­turn­ing to the Promised Land, and the Pharaoh’s army did per­ish at pre­cisely that lo­cal­ity. So I think that ex­ca­vat­ing those sands would bring to light a great many weapons and tools of Egyp­tian ori­gin.”</p>
				<p>“Ob­vi­ously,” I replied. “And for the sake of ar­chae­ol­ogy, let’s hope that sooner or later such ex­ca­va­tions do take place, once new towns are set­tled on the isth­mus af­ter the Suez Canal has been cut through—a canal, by the way, of lit­tle use to a ship such as the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i>!”</p>
				<p>“Surely, but of great use to the world at large,” Cap­tain Nemo said. “The an­cients well un­der­stood the use­ful­ness to com­merce of con­nect­ing the Red Sea with the Mediter­ranean, but they never dreamed of cut­ting a canal be­tween the two, and in­stead they picked the Nile as their link. If we can trust tra­di­tion, it was prob­a­bly Egypt’s King Se­sostris who started dig­ging the canal needed to join the Nile with the Red Sea. What’s cer­tain is that in 615 <span class="era">BC</span> King Ne­cho <span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span> was hard at work on a canal that was fed by Nile wa­ter and ran through the Egyp­tian plains op­po­site Ara­bia. This canal could be trav­eled in four days, and it was so wide, two triple-tiered gal­leys could pass through it abreast. Its con­struc­tion was con­tin­ued by Dar­ius the Great, son of Hys­taspes, and prob­a­bly com­pleted by King Ptolemy <i epub:type="z3998:roman">II</i>. Strabo saw it used for ship­ping; but the weak­ness of its slope be­tween its start­ing point, near Bubastis, and the Red Sea left it nav­i­ga­ble only a few months out of the year. This canal served com­merce un­til the cen­tury of Rome’s An­to­nine em­per­ors; it was then aban­doned and cov­ered with sand, sub­se­quently re­in­stated by Ara­bia’s Caliph Omar <span epub:type="z3998:roman">I</span>, and fi­nally filled in for good in 761 or 762 <span class="era">AD</span> by Caliph Al-Mansur, in an ef­fort to pre­vent sup­plies from reach­ing Mo­hammed ibn Ab­dul­lah, who had re­belled against him. Dur­ing his Egyp­tian cam­paign, your Gen­eral Napoleon Bon­a­parte dis­cov­ered traces of this old canal in the Suez desert, and when the tide caught him by sur­prise, he well-nigh per­ished just a few hours be­fore re­join­ing his reg­i­ment at Had­jaroth, the very place where Moses had pitched camp 3,300 years be­fore him.”</p>
				<p>“Well, cap­tain, what the an­cients hes­i­tated to un­der­take, Mr. de Lesseps is now fin­ish­ing up; his join­ing of these two seas will shorten the route from Cadiz to the East Indies by 9,000 kilo­me­ters, and he’ll soon change Africa into an im­mense is­land.”</p>
				<p>“Yes, Pro­fes­sor Aron­nax, and you have ev­ery right to be proud of your fel­low coun­try­man. Such a man brings a na­tion more honor than the great­est com­man­ders! Like so many oth­ers, he be­gan with dif­fi­cul­ties and set­backs, but he tri­umphed be­cause he has the vol­un­teer spirit. And it’s sad to think that this deed, which should have been an in­ter­na­tional deed, which would have in­sured that any ad­min­is­tra­tion went down in his­tory, will suc­ceed only through the ef­forts of one man. So all hail to Mr. de Lesseps!”</p>
				<p>“Yes, all hail to that great French cit­i­zen,” I replied, quite star­tled by how em­phat­i­cally Cap­tain Nemo had just spo­ken.</p>
				<p>“Un­for­tu­nately,” he went on, “I can’t take you through that Suez Canal, but the day af­ter to­mor­row, you’ll be able to see the long jet­ties of Port Said when we’re in the Mediter­ranean.”</p>
				<p>“In the Mediter­ranean!” I ex­claimed.</p>
				<p>“Yes, pro­fes­sor. Does that amaze you?”</p>
				<p>“What amazes me is think­ing we’ll be there the day af­ter to­mor­row.”</p>
				<p>“Oh re­ally?”</p>
				<p>“Yes, cap­tain, al­though since I’ve been aboard your ves­sel, I should have formed the habit of not be­ing amazed by any­thing!”</p>
				<p>“But what is it that star­tles you?”</p>
				<p>“The thought of how hideously fast the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i> will need to go, if it’s to dou­ble the Cape of Good Hope, cir­cle around Africa, and lie in the open Mediter­ranean by the day af­ter to­mor­row.”</p>
				<p>“And who says it will cir­cle Africa, pro­fes­sor? What’s this talk about dou­bling the Cape of Good Hope?”</p>
				<p>“But un­less the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i> nav­i­gates on dry land and crosses over the isth­mus—”</p>
				<p>“Or un­der it, Pro­fes­sor Aron­nax.”</p>
				<p>“Un­der it?”</p>
				<p>“Surely,” Cap­tain Nemo replied serenely. “Un­der that tongue of land, na­ture long ago made what man to­day is mak­ing on its sur­face.”</p>
				<p>“What! There’s a pas­sage­way?”</p>
				<p>“Yes, an un­der­ground pas­sage­way that I’ve named the Ara­bian Tun­nel. It starts be­low Suez and leads to the Bay of Pelu­sium.”</p>
				<p>“But isn’t that isth­mus only com­posed of quick­sand?”</p>
				<p>“To a cer­tain depth. But at merely fifty me­ters, one en­coun­ters a firm foun­da­tion of rock.”</p>
				<p>“And it’s by luck that you dis­cov­ered this pas­sage­way?” I asked, more and more star­tled.</p>
				<p>“Luck plus logic, pro­fes­sor, and logic even more than luck.”</p>
				<p>“Cap­tain, I hear you, but I can’t be­lieve my ears.”</p>
				<p>“Oh, sir! The old say­ing still holds good: <i lang="la" xml:lang="la">Aures habent et non au­di­ent!</i><a class="epub-type-noteref" href="../text/endnotes.xhtml#note-12" id="note-12" epub:type="noteref">12</a> Not only does this pas­sage­way ex­ist, but I’ve taken ad­van­tage of it on sev­eral oc­ca­sions. Without it, I wouldn’t have ven­tured to­day into such a blind al­ley as the Red Sea.”</p>
				<p>“Is it in­dis­creet to ask how you dis­cov­ered this tun­nel?”</p>
				<p>“Sir,” the cap­tain an­swered me, “there can be no se­crets be­tween men who will never leave each other.”</p>
				<p>I ig­nored this in­nu­endo and waited for Cap­tain Nemo’s ex­pla­na­tion.</p>
				<p>“Pro­fes­sor,” he told me, “the sim­ple logic of the nat­u­ral­ist led me to dis­cover this pas­sage­way, and I alone am fa­mil­iar with it. I’d noted that in the Red Sea and the Mediter­ranean there ex­ist a num­ber of ab­so­lutely iden­ti­cal species of fish: eels, but­ter­fish, green­fish, bass, jew­elfish, fly­ing fish. Cer­tain of this fact, I won­dered if there weren’t a con­nec­tion be­tween the two seas. If there were, its un­der­ground cur­rent had to go from the Red Sea to the Mediter­ranean sim­ply be­cause of their dif­fer­ence in level. So I caught a large num­ber of fish in the vicin­ity of Suez. I slipped cop­per rings around their tails and tossed them back into the sea. A few months later off the coast of Syria, I re­cap­tured a few spec­i­mens of my fish, adorned with their tell­tale rings. So this proved to me that some con­nec­tion ex­isted be­tween the two seas. I searched for it with my <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i>, I dis­cov­ered it, I ven­tured into it; and soon, pro­fes­sor, you also will have cleared my Ara­bic tun­nel!”</p>
			</section>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
