<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="en-US" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: http://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Chapter 14</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="part-2" epub:type="part">
			<section id="chapter-2-14" epub:type="chapter">
				<h3 epub:type="title">
					<span class="first-child" epub:type="z3998:roman">XIV</span>
					<span class="epub-type-subtitle" epub:type="subtitle">The South Pole</span>
				</h3>
				<p>I rushed up onto the plat­form. Yes, open sea! Barely a few sparse floes, some mov­ing ice­bergs; a sea stretch­ing into the dis­tance; hosts of birds in the air and myr­i­ads of fish un­der the wa­ters, which var­ied from in­tense blue to olive green de­pend­ing on the depth. The ther­mome­ter marked 3° centi­grade. It was as if a com­par­a­tive spring­time had been locked up be­hind that Ice Bank, whose dis­tant masses were out­lined on the north­ern hori­zon.</p>
				<p>“Are we at the pole?” I asked the cap­tain, my heart pound­ing.</p>
				<p>“I’ve no idea,” he an­swered me. “At noon we’ll fix our po­si­tion.”</p>
				<p>“But will the sun show through this mist?” I said, star­ing at the gray­ish sky.</p>
				<p>“No mat­ter how faintly it shines, it will be enough for me,” the cap­tain replied.</p>
				<p>To the south, ten miles from the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i>, a soli­tary islet rose to a height of 200 me­ters. We pro­ceeded to­ward it, but cau­tiously, be­cause this sea could have been strewn with reefs.</p>
				<p>In an hour we had reached the islet. Two hours later we had com­pleted a full cir­cle around it. It mea­sured four to five miles in cir­cum­fer­ence. A nar­row chan­nel sep­a­rated it from a con­sid­er­able shore, per­haps a con­ti­nent whose lim­its we couldn’t see. The ex­is­tence of this shore seemed to bear out Com­man­der Maury’s hy­pothe­ses. In essence, this in­ge­nious Amer­i­can has noted that be­tween the South Pole and the 60th par­al­lel, the sea is cov­ered with float­ing ice of di­men­sions much greater than any found in the north At­lantic. From this fact he drew the con­clu­sion that the Antarc­tic Cir­cle must con­tain con­sid­er­able shores, since ice­bergs can’t form on the high seas but only along coast­lines. Ac­cord­ing to his cal­cu­la­tions, this frozen mass en­clos­ing the south­ern­most pole forms a vast ice cap whose width must reach 4,000 kilo­me­ters.</p>
				<p>Mean­while, to avoid run­ning aground, the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i> halted three ca­ble lengths from a strand crowned by su­perb piles of rocks. The skiff was launched to sea. Two crew­men car­ry­ing in­stru­ments, the cap­tain, Con­seil, and I were on board. It was ten o’clock in the morn­ing. I hadn’t seen Ned Land. No doubt, in the pres­ence of the South Pole, the Cana­dian hated hav­ing to eat his words.</p>
				<p>A few strokes of the oar brought the skiff to the sand, where it ran aground. Just as Con­seil was about to jump ashore, I held him back.</p>
				<p>“Sir,” I told Cap­tain Nemo, “to you be­longs the honor of first set­ting foot on this shore.”</p>
				<p>“Yes, sir,” the cap­tain replied, “and if I have no hes­i­ta­tion in tread­ing this po­lar soil, it’s be­cause no hu­man be­ing un­til now has left a foot­print here.”</p>
				<p>So say­ing, he leaped lightly onto the sand. His heart must have been throb­bing with in­tense ex­cite­ment. He scaled an over­hang­ing rock that ended in a small promon­tory and there, mute and mo­tion­less, with crossed arms and blaz­ing eyes, he seemed to be lay­ing claim to these south­ern­most re­gions. After spend­ing five min­utes in this trance, he turned to us.</p>
				<p>“When­ever you’re ready, sir,” he called to me.</p>
				<p>I got out, Con­seil at my heels, leav­ing the two men in the skiff.</p>
				<p>Over an ex­ten­sive area, the soil con­sisted of that ig­neous gravel called <i>tuff</i>, red­dish in color as if made from crushed bricks. The ground was cov­ered with slag, lava flows, and pumice stones. Its vol­canic ori­gin was un­mis­tak­able. In cer­tain lo­cal­i­ties thin smoke holes gave off a sul­furous odor, show­ing that the in­ner fires still kept their wide-rang­ing power. Nev­er­the­less, when I scaled a high es­carp­ment, I could see no vol­ca­noes within a ra­dius of sev­eral miles. In these Antarc­tic dis­tricts, as is well known, Sir James Clark Ross had found the craters of Mt. Ere­bus and Mt. Ter­ror in fully ac­tive con­di­tion on the 167th merid­ian at lat­i­tude 77° 32′.</p>
				<p>The veg­e­ta­tion on this des­o­late con­ti­nent struck me as quite lim­ited. A few lichens of the species <i epub:type="z3998:taxonomy">Us­nea melanox­an­thra</i> sprawled over the black rocks. The whole mea­ger flora of this re­gion con­sisted of cer­tain mi­cro­scopic buds, rudi­men­tary di­atoms made up of a type of cell po­si­tioned be­tween two quartz-rich shells, plus long pur­ple and crim­son fu­cus plants, buoyed by small air blad­ders and washed up on the coast by the surf.</p>
				<p>The beach was strewn with mol­lusks: small mus­sels, limpets, smooth heart-shaped cock­les, and es­pe­cially some sea but­ter­flies with ob­long, mem­brane-filled bod­ies whose heads are formed from two rounded lobes. I also saw myr­i­ads of those north­ern­most sea but­ter­flies three cen­time­ters long, which a baleen whale can swal­low by the thou­sands in one gulp. The open wa­ters at the shore­line were alive with these de­light­ful pteropods, true but­ter­flies of the sea.</p>
				<p>Among other zoophytes present in these shal­lows, there were a few coral tree forms that, ac­cord­ing to Sir James Clark Ross, live in these Antarc­tic seas at depths as great as 1,000 me­ters; then small al­cyon coral be­long­ing to the species <i epub:type="z3998:taxonomy">Pro­cel­laria pelag­ica</i>, also a large num­ber of starfish unique to these climes, plus some feather stars span­gling the sand.</p>
				<p>But it was in the air that life was su­per­abun­dant. There var­i­ous species of birds flew and flut­tered by the thou­sands, deaf­en­ing us with their calls. Crowd­ing the rocks, other fowl watched with­out fear as we passed and pressed fa­mil­iarly against our feet. Th­ese were auks, as ag­ile and sup­ple in wa­ter, where they are some­times mis­taken for fast bonito, as they are clumsy and heavy on land. They ut­tered out­landish calls and par­tic­i­pated in nu­mer­ous pub­lic as­sem­blies that fea­tured much noise but lit­tle ac­tion.</p>
				<p>Among other fowl I noted some sheath­bills from the wad­ing-bird fam­ily, the size of pi­geons, white in color, the beak short and con­i­cal, the eyes framed by red cir­cles. Con­seil laid in a sup­ply of them, be­cause when they’re prop­erly cooked, these winged crea­tures make a pleas­ant dish. In the air there passed sooty al­ba­tross with four-me­ter wing­spans, birds aptly dubbed “vul­tures of the ocean,” also gi­gan­tic pe­trels in­clud­ing sev­eral with arch­ing wings, en­thu­si­as­tic eaters of seal that are known as <i lang="es" xml:lang="es">que­bran­tahue­sos</i>,<a class="epub-type-noteref" href="../text/endnotes.xhtml#note-18" id="note-18" epub:type="noteref">18</a> and cape pi­geons, a sort of small duck, the tops of their bod­ies black and white—in short, a whole se­ries of pe­trels, some whitish with wings trimmed in brown, oth­ers blue and ex­clu­sive to these Antarc­tic seas, the for­mer “so oily,” I told Con­seil, “that in­hab­i­tants of the Faroe Is­lands sim­ply fit the bird with a wick, then light it up.”</p>
				<p>“With that mi­nor ad­di­tion,” Con­seil replied, “these fowl would make per­fect lamps! After this, we should in­sist that na­ture equip them with wicks in ad­vance!”</p>
				<p>Half a mile far­ther on, the ground was com­pletely rid­dled with pen­guin nests, egg-lay­ing bur­rows from which nu­mer­ous birds emerged. Later Cap­tain Nemo had hun­dreds of them hunted be­cause their black flesh is highly ed­i­ble. They brayed like don­keys. The size of a goose with slate-col­ored bod­ies, white un­der­sides, and lemon-col­ored neck bands, these an­i­mals let them­selves be stoned to death with­out mak­ing any ef­fort to get away.</p>
				<p>Mean­while the mists didn’t clear, and by eleven o’clock the sun still hadn’t made an ap­pear­ance. Its ab­sence dis­turbed me. Without it, no sights were pos­si­ble. Then how could we tell whether we had reached the pole?</p>
				<p>When I re­joined Cap­tain Nemo, I found him lean­ing silently against a piece of rock and star­ing at the sky. He seemed im­pa­tient, baf­fled. But what could we do? This dar­ing and pow­er­ful man couldn’t con­trol the sun as he did the sea.</p>
				<p>Noon ar­rived with­out the orb of day ap­pear­ing for a sin­gle in­stant. You couldn’t even find its hid­ing place be­hind the cur­tain of mist. And soon this mist be­gan to con­dense into snow.</p>
				<p>“Un­til to­mor­row,” the cap­tain said sim­ply; and we went back to the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i>, amid flur­ries in the air.</p>
				<p>Dur­ing our ab­sence the nets had been spread, and I ob­served with fas­ci­na­tion the fish just hauled on board. The Antarc­tic seas serve as a refuge for an ex­tremely large num­ber of mi­gra­tory fish that flee from storms in the sub­po­lar zones, in truth only to slide down the gul­lets of por­poises and seals. I noted some one-decime­ter south­ern bull­head, a species of whitish car­ti­lagi­nous fish over­run with bluish gray stripes and armed with stings, then some Antarc­tic rab­bit­fish three feet long, the body very slen­der, the skin a smooth sil­ver white, the head rounded, the top­side fur­nished with three fins, the snout end­ing in a trunk that curved back to­ward the mouth. I sam­pled its flesh but found it taste­less, de­spite Con­seil’s views, which were largely ap­prov­ing.</p>
				<p>The bliz­zard lasted un­til the next day. It was im­pos­si­ble to stay on the plat­form. From the lounge, where I was writ­ing up the in­ci­dents of this ex­cur­sion to the po­lar con­ti­nent, I could hear the calls of pe­trel and al­ba­tross ca­vort­ing in the midst of the tur­moil. The <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i> didn’t stay idle, and cruis­ing along the coast, it ad­vanced some ten miles far­ther south amid the half light left by the sun as it skimmed the edge of the hori­zon.</p>
				<p>The next day, March 20, it stopped snow­ing. The cold was a lit­tle more brisk. The ther­mome­ter marked −2° centi­grade. The mist had cleared, and on that day I hoped our noon sights could be ac­com­plished.</p>
				<p>Since Cap­tain Nemo hadn’t yet ap­peared, only Con­seil and I were taken ashore by the skiff. The soil’s na­ture was still the same: vol­canic. Traces of lava, slag, and basaltic rock were ev­ery­where, but I couldn’t find the crater that had vom­ited them up. There as yon­der, myr­i­ads of birds en­livened this part of the po­lar con­ti­nent. But they had to share their do­min­ion with huge herds of ma­rine mam­mals that looked at us with gen­tle eyes. Th­ese were seals of var­i­ous species, some stretched out on the ground, oth­ers ly­ing on drift­ing ice floes, sev­eral leav­ing or reen­ter­ing the sea. Hav­ing never dealt with man, they didn’t run off at our ap­proach, and I counted enough of them there­abouts to pro­vi­sion a cou­ple hun­dred ships.</p>
				<p>“Ye gods,” Con­seil said, “it’s for­tu­nate that Ned Land didn’t come with us!”</p>
				<p>“Why so, Con­seil?”</p>
				<p>“Be­cause that mad­cap hunter would kill ev­ery an­i­mal here.”</p>
				<p>“Every an­i­mal may be over­stat­ing it, but in truth I doubt we could keep our Cana­dian friend from har­poon­ing some of these mag­nif­i­cent cetaceans. Which would be an af­front to Cap­tain Nemo, since he hates to slay harm­less beasts need­lessly.”</p>
				<p>“He’s right.”</p>
				<p>“Cer­tainly, Con­seil. But tell me, haven’t you fin­ished clas­si­fy­ing these su­perb spec­i­mens of ma­rine fauna?”</p>
				<p>“Master is well aware,” Con­seil replied, “that I’m not sea­soned in prac­ti­cal ap­pli­ca­tion. When mas­ter has told me these an­i­mals’ names …”</p>
				<p>“They’re seals and wal­ruses.”</p>
				<p>“Two gen­era,” our schol­arly Con­seil has­tened to say, “that be­long to the fam­ily <i epub:type="z3998:taxonomy">Pin­ni­pedia</i>, or­der <i epub:type="z3998:taxonomy">Car­nivora</i>, group <i epub:type="z3998:taxonomy">Un­guic­u­lata</i>, sub­class <i epub:type="z3998:taxonomy">Mon­odel­phia</i>, class <i epub:type="z3998:taxonomy">Mam­malia</i>, branch <i epub:type="z3998:taxonomy">Ver­te­brata</i>.”</p>
				<p>“Very nice, Con­seil,” I replied, “but these two gen­era of seals and wal­ruses are each di­vided into species, and if I’m not mis­taken, we now have a chance to ac­tu­ally look at them. Let’s.”</p>
				<p>It was eight o’clock in the morn­ing. We had four hours to our­selves be­fore the sun could be pro­duc­tively ob­served. I guided our steps to­ward a huge bay that made a cres­cent-shaped in­ci­sion in the gran­ite cliffs along the beach.</p>
				<p>There, all about us, I swear that the shores and ice floes were crowded with ma­rine mam­mals as far as the eye could see, and I in­vol­un­tar­ily looked around for old Pro­teus, that mytho­log­i­cal shep­herd who guarded King Nep­tune’s im­mense flocks. To be spe­cific, these were seals. They formed dis­tinct male-and-fe­male groups, the fa­ther watch­ing over his fam­ily, the mother suck­ling her lit­tle ones, the stronger young­sters eman­ci­pated a few paces away. When these mam­mals wanted to re­lo­cate, they moved in lit­tle jumps made by con­tract­ing their bod­ies, clum­sily helped by their im­per­fectly de­vel­oped flip­pers, which, as with their man­a­tee rel­a­tives, form ac­tual fore­arms. In the wa­ter, their ideal el­e­ment, I must say these an­i­mals swim won­der­fully thanks to their flex­i­ble back­bones, nar­row pelvises, close-cropped hair, and webbed feet. Rest­ing on shore, they as­sumed ex­tremely grace­ful po­si­tions. Con­se­quently, their gen­tle fea­tures, their sen­si­tive ex­pres­sions equal to those of the loveli­est women, their soft, limpid eyes, their charm­ing poses, led the an­cients to glo­rify them by meta­mor­phos­ing the males into sea gods and the fe­males into mer­maids.</p>
				<p>I drew Con­seil’s at­ten­tion to the con­sid­er­able growth of the cere­bral lobes found in these in­tel­li­gent cetaceans. No mam­mal ex­cept man has more abun­dant cere­bral mat­ter. Ac­cord­ingly, seals are quite ca­pa­ble of be­ing ed­u­cated; they make good pets, and to­gether with cer­tain other nat­u­ral­ists, I think these an­i­mals can be prop­erly trained to per­form yeo­man ser­vice as hunt­ing dogs for fish­er­men.</p>
				<p>Most of these seals were sleep­ing on the rocks or the sand. Among those prop­erly termed seals—which have no ex­ter­nal ears, un­like sea li­ons whose ears pro­trude—I ob­served sev­eral va­ri­eties of the species <i epub:type="z3998:taxonomy">stenorhynchus</i>, three me­ters long, with white hair, bull­dog heads, and armed with ten teeth in each jaw: four in­cisors in both the up­per and lower, plus two big ca­nines shaped like the fleur-de-lis. Among them slith­ered some sea ele­phants, a type of seal with a short, flex­i­ble trunk; these are the gi­ants of the species, with a cir­cum­fer­ence of twenty feet and a length of ten me­ters. They didn’t move as we ap­proached.</p>
				<p>“Are these an­i­mals dan­ger­ous?” Con­seil asked me.</p>
				<p>“Only if they’re at­tacked,” I replied. “But when these gi­ant seals de­fend their lit­tle ones, their fury is dread­ful, and it isn’t rare for them to smash a fish­er­man’s long­boat to bits.”</p>
				<p>“They’re within their rights,” Con­seil an­swered.</p>
				<p>“I don’t say nay.”</p>
				<p>Two miles far­ther on, we were stopped by a promon­tory that screened the bay from southerly winds. It dropped straight down to the sea, and surf foamed against it. From be­yond this ridge there came fear­some bel­lows, such as a herd of cat­tle might pro­duce.</p>
				<p>“Gra­cious,” Con­seil put in, “a choir of bulls?”</p>
				<p>“No,” I said, “a choir of wal­ruses.”</p>
				<p>“Are they fight­ing with each other?”</p>
				<p>“Either fight­ing or play­ing.”</p>
				<p>“With all due re­spect to mas­ter, this we must see.”</p>
				<p>“Then see it we must, Con­seil.”</p>
				<p>And there we were, climb­ing these black­ish rocks amid sud­den land­slides and over stones slip­pery with ice. More than once I took a tum­ble at the ex­pense of my back­side. Con­seil, more cau­tious or more sta­ble, barely fal­tered and would help me up, say­ing:</p>
				<p>“If mas­ter’s legs would kindly adopt a wider stance, mas­ter will keep his bal­ance.”</p>
				<p>Ar­riv­ing at the top­most ridge of this promon­tory, I could see vast white plains cov­ered with wal­ruses. Th­ese an­i­mals were play­ing among them­selves. They were howl­ing not in anger but in glee.</p>
				<p>Wal­ruses re­sem­ble seals in the shape of their bod­ies and the ar­range­ment of their limbs. But their lower jaws lack ca­nines and in­cisors, and as for their up­per ca­nines, they con­sist of two tusks eighty cen­time­ters long with a cir­cum­fer­ence of thirty-three cen­time­ters at the socket. Made of solid ivory, with­out stri­a­tions, harder than ele­phant tusks, and less prone to yel­low­ing, these teeth are in great de­mand. Ac­cord­ingly, wal­ruses are the vic­tims of a mind­less hunt­ing that soon will de­stroy them all, since their hunters in­dis­crim­i­nately slaugh­ter preg­nant fe­males and young­sters, and over 4,000 in­di­vid­u­als are de­stroyed an­nu­ally.</p>
				<p>Pass­ing near these un­usual an­i­mals, I could ex­am­ine them at my leisure since they didn’t stir. Their hides were rough and heavy, a tan color lean­ing to­ward a red­dish brown; their coats were short and less than abun­dant. Some were four me­ters long. More tran­quil and less fear­ful than their north­ern rel­a­tives, they posted no sen­tinels on guard duty at the ap­proaches to their camp­site.</p>
				<p>After ex­am­in­ing this com­mu­nity of wal­ruses, I de­cided to re­turn in my tracks. It was eleven o’clock, and if Cap­tain Nemo found con­di­tions fa­vor­able for tak­ing his sights, I wanted to be present at the op­er­a­tion. But I held no hopes that the sun would make an ap­pear­ance that day. It was hid­den from our eyes by clouds squeezed to­gether on the hori­zon. Ap­par­ently the jeal­ous orb didn’t want to re­veal this in­ac­ces­si­ble spot on the globe to any hu­man be­ing.</p>
				<p>Yet I de­cided to re­turn to the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i>. We went along a steep, nar­row path that ran over the cliff’s sum­mit. By 11:30 we had ar­rived at our land­ing place. The beached skiff had brought the cap­tain ashore. I spot­ted him stand­ing on a chunk of basalt. His in­stru­ments were be­side him. His eyes were fo­cused on the north­ern hori­zon, along which the sun was sweep­ing in its ex­tended arc.</p>
				<p>I found a place near him and waited with­out speak­ing. Noon ar­rived, and just as on the day be­fore, the sun didn’t put in an ap­pear­ance.</p>
				<p>It was sheer bad luck. Our noon sights were still lack­ing. If we couldn’t ob­tain them to­mor­row, we would fi­nally have to give up any hope of fix­ing our po­si­tion.</p>
				<p>In essence, it was pre­cisely March 20. To­mor­row, the 21st, was the day of the equinox; the sun would dis­ap­pear be­low the hori­zon for six months not count­ing re­frac­tion, and af­ter its dis­ap­pear­ance the long po­lar night would be­gin. Fol­low­ing the Septem­ber equinox, the sun had emerged above the northerly hori­zon, ris­ing in long spi­rals un­til De­cem­ber 21. At that time, the sum­mer sol­stice of these south­ern­most dis­tricts, the sun had started back down, and to­mor­row it would cast its last rays.</p>
				<p>I shared my thoughts and fears with Cap­tain Nemo.</p>
				<p>“You’re right, Pro­fes­sor Aron­nax,” he told me. “If I can’t take the sun’s al­ti­tude to­mor­row, I won’t be able to try again for an­other six months. But pre­cisely be­cause sailors’ luck has led me into these seas on March 21, it will be easy to get our bear­ings if the noon­day sun does ap­pear be­fore our eyes.”</p>
				<p>“Why easy, cap­tain?”</p>
				<p>“Be­cause when the orb of day sweeps in such long spi­rals, it’s dif­fi­cult to mea­sure its ex­act al­ti­tude above the hori­zon, and our in­stru­ments are open to com­mit­ting se­ri­ous er­rors.”</p>
				<p>“Then what can you do?”</p>
				<p>“I use only my chronome­ter,” Cap­tain Nemo an­swered me. “At noon to­mor­row, March 21, if, af­ter ac­count­ing for re­frac­tion, the sun’s disk is cut ex­actly in half by the north­ern hori­zon, that will mean I’m at the South Pole.”</p>
				<p>“Right,” I said. “Nev­er­the­less, it isn’t math­e­mat­i­cally ex­act proof, be­cause the equinox needn’t fall pre­cisely at noon.”</p>
				<p>“No doubt, sir, but the er­ror will be un­der 100 me­ters, and that’s close enough for us. Un­til to­mor­row then.”</p>
				<p>Cap­tain Nemo went back on board. Con­seil and I stayed be­hind un­til five o’clock, sur­vey­ing the beach, ob­serv­ing and study­ing. The only un­usual ob­ject I picked up was an auk’s egg of re­mark­able size, for which a col­lec­tor would have paid more than 1,000 francs. Its cream-col­ored tint, plus the streaks and mark­ings that dec­o­rated it like so many hi­ero­glyph­ics, made it a rare trin­ket. I placed it in Con­seil’s hands, and hold­ing it like pre­cious porce­lain from China, that cau­tious, sure­footed lad got it back to the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i> in one piece.</p>
				<p>There I put this rare egg in­side one of the glass cases in the mu­seum. I ate sup­per, feast­ing with ap­petite on an ex­cel­lent piece of seal liver whose fla­vor re­minded me of pork. Then I went to bed; but not with­out pray­ing, like a good Hindu, for the fa­vors of the ra­di­ant orb.</p>
				<p>The next day, March 21, bright and early at five o’clock in the morn­ing, I climbed onto the plat­form. I found Cap­tain Nemo there.</p>
				<p>“The weather is clear­ing a bit,” he told me. “I have high hopes. After break­fast we’ll make our way ashore and choose an ob­ser­va­tion post.”</p>
				<p>This is­sue set­tled, I went to find Ned Land. I wanted to take him with me. The ob­sti­nate Cana­dian re­fused, and I could clearly see that his tightlipped mood and his bad tem­per were grow­ing by the day. Un­der the cir­cum­stances I ul­ti­mately wasn’t sorry that he re­fused. In truth, there were too many seals ashore, and it would never do to ex­pose this im­pul­sive fish­er­man to such temp­ta­tions.</p>
				<p>Break­fast over, I made my way ashore. The <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i> had gone a few more miles dur­ing the night. It lay well out, a good league from the coast, which was crowned by a sharp peak 400 to 500 me­ters high. In ad­di­tion to me, the skiff car­ried Cap­tain Nemo, two crew­men, and the in­stru­ments—in other words, a chronome­ter, a spy­glass, and a barom­e­ter.</p>
				<p>Dur­ing our cross­ing I saw nu­mer­ous baleen whales be­long­ing to the three species unique to these south­ern­most seas: the bow­head whale (or “right whale,” ac­cord­ing to the English), which has no dor­sal fin; the hump­back whale from the genus <i epub:type="z3998:taxonomy">Balaenoptera</i> (in other words, “winged whales”), beasts with wrin­kled bel­lies and huge whitish fins that, genus name re­gard­less, do not yet form wings; and the fin­back whale, yel­low­ish brown, the swiftest of all cetaceans. This pow­er­ful an­i­mal is au­di­ble from far away when it sends up tow­er­ing spouts of air and steam that re­sem­ble swirls of smoke. Herds of these dif­fer­ent mam­mals were play­ing about in the tran­quil wa­ters, and I could eas­ily see that this Antarc­tic po­lar basin now served as a refuge for those cetaceans too re­lent­lessly pur­sued by hunters.</p>
				<p>I also noted long, whitish strings of salps, a type of mol­lusk found in clus­ters, and some jel­ly­fish of large size that swayed in the ed­dies of the bil­lows.</p>
				<p>By nine o’clock we had pulled up to shore. The sky was grow­ing brighter. Clouds were flee­ing to the south. Mists were ris­ing from the cold sur­face of the wa­ter. Cap­tain Nemo headed to­ward the peak, which he no doubt planned to make his ob­ser­va­tory. It was an ar­du­ous climb over sharp lava and pumice stones in the midst of air of­ten reek­ing with sul­furous fumes from the smoke holes. For a man out of prac­tice at tread­ing land, the cap­tain scaled the steep­est slopes with a sup­ple agility I couldn’t equal, and which would have been en­vied by hunters of Pyre­nees moun­tain goats.</p>
				<p>It took us two hours to reach the sum­mit of this half-crys­tal, half-basalt peak. From there our eyes scanned a vast sea, which scrawled its bound­ary line firmly against the back­ground of the north­ern sky. At our feet: daz­zling tracts of white. Over our heads: a pale azure, clear of mists. North of us: the sun’s disk, like a ball of fire al­ready cut into by the edge of the hori­zon. From the heart of the wa­ters: jets of liq­uid ris­ing like hun­dreds of mag­nif­i­cent bou­quets. Far off, like a sleep­ing cetacean: the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i>. Be­hind us to the south and east: an im­mense shore, a chaotic heap of rocks and ice whose lim­its we couldn’t see.</p>
				<p>Ar­riv­ing at the sum­mit of this peak, Cap­tain Nemo care­fully de­ter­mined its el­e­va­tion by means of his barom­e­ter, since he had to take this fac­tor into ac­count in his noon sights.</p>
				<p>At 11:45 the sun, by then seen only by re­frac­tion, looked like a golden disk, dis­pers­ing its last rays over this de­serted con­ti­nent and down to these seas not yet plowed by the ships of man.</p>
				<p>Cap­tain Nemo had brought a spy­glass with a retic­u­lar eye­piece, which cor­rected the sun’s re­frac­tion by means of a mir­ror, and he used it to ob­serve the orb sink­ing lit­tle by lit­tle along a very ex­tended di­ag­o­nal that reached be­low the hori­zon. I held the chronome­ter. My heart was pound­ing might­ily. If the lower half of the sun’s disk dis­ap­peared just as the chronome­ter said noon, we were right at the pole.</p>
				<p>“Noon!” I called.</p>
				<p>“The South Pole!” Cap­tain Nemo replied in a solemn voice, hand­ing me the spy­glass, which showed the orb of day cut into two ex­actly equal parts by the hori­zon.</p>
				<p>I stared at the last rays wreath­ing this peak, while shad­ows were grad­u­ally climb­ing its gra­di­ents.</p>
				<p>Just then, rest­ing his hand on my shoul­der, Cap­tain Nemo said to me:</p>
				<p>“In 1600, sir, the Dutch­man Gher­itk was swept by storms and cur­rents, reach­ing lat­i­tude 64° south and dis­cov­er­ing the South Shet­land Is­lands. On Jan­uary 17, 1773, the fa­mous Cap­tain Cook went along the 38th merid­ian, ar­riv­ing at lat­i­tude 67° 30′; and on Jan­uary 30, 1774, along the 109th merid­ian, he reached lat­i­tude 71° 15′. In 1819 the Rus­sian Belling­hausen lay on the 69th par­al­lel, and in 1821 on the 66th at lon­gi­tude 111° west. In 1820 the English­man Brans­field stopped at 65°. That same year the Amer­i­can Mor­rel, whose re­ports are du­bi­ous, went along the 42nd merid­ian, find­ing open sea at lat­i­tude 70° 14′. In 1825 the English­man Pow­ell was un­able to get be­yond 62°. That same year a hum­ble seal fish­er­man, the English­man Wed­dell, went as far as lat­i­tude 72° 14′ on the 35th merid­ian, and as far as 74° 15′ on the 36th. In 1829 the English­man Forster, com­man­der of the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Chan­ti­cleer</i>, laid claim to the Antarc­tic con­ti­nent in lat­i­tude 63° 26′ and lon­gi­tude 66° 26′. On Fe­bru­ary 1, 1831, the English­man Bis­coe dis­cov­ered En­derby Land at lat­i­tude 68° 50′, Ade­laide Land at lat­i­tude 67° on Fe­bru­ary 5, 1832, and Gra­ham Land at lat­i­tude 64° 45′ on Fe­bru­ary 21. In 1838 the French­man Du­mont d’Urville stopped at the Ice Bank in lat­i­tude 62° 57′, sight­ing the Louis-Philippe Penin­sula; on Jan­uary 21 two years later, at a new southerly po­si­tion of 66° 30′, he named the Adélie Coast and eight days later, the Clarie Coast at 64° 40′. In 1838 the Amer­i­can Wilkes ad­vanced as far as the 69th par­al­lel on the 100th merid­ian. In 1839 the English­man Bal­leny dis­cov­ered the Sab­rina Coast at the edge of the po­lar cir­cle. Lastly, on Jan­uary 12, 1842, with his ships, the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Ere­bus</i> and the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Ter­ror</i>, the English­man Sir James Clark Ross found Vic­to­ria Land in lat­i­tude 70° 56′ and lon­gi­tude 171° 7′ east; on the 23rd of that same month, he reached the 74th par­al­lel, a po­si­tion de­not­ing the Farthest South at­tained un­til then; on the 27th he lay at 76° 8′; on the 28th at 77° 32′; on Fe­bru­ary 2 at 78° 4′; and late in 1842 he re­turned to 71° but couldn’t get be­yond it. Well now! In 1868, on this 21st day of March, I my­self, Cap­tain Nemo, have reached the South Pole at 90°, and I hereby claim this en­tire part of the globe, equal to one-sixth of the known con­ti­nents.”</p>
				<p>“In the name of which sov­er­eign, cap­tain?”</p>
				<p>“In my own name, sir!”</p>
				<p>So say­ing, Cap­tain Nemo un­furled a black flag bear­ing a gold <i>N</i> on its quar­tered bunting. Then, turn­ing to­ward the orb of day, whose last rays were lick­ing at the sea’s hori­zon:</p>
				<p>“Farewell, O sun!” he called. “Dis­ap­pear, O ra­di­ant orb! Re­tire be­neath this open sea, and let six months of night spread their shad­ows over my new do­mains!”</p>
			</section>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
