<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="en-US" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: http://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Chapter 20</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="part-2" epub:type="part">
			<section id="chapter-2-20" epub:type="chapter">
				<h3 epub:type="title">
					<span class="first-child" epub:type="z3998:roman">XX</span>
					<span class="epub-type-subtitle" epub:type="subtitle">In Latitude 47° 24′ and Longitude 17° 28′</span>
				</h3>
				<p>In the af­ter­math of this storm, we were thrown back to the east.  Away went any hope of es­cap­ing to the land­ing places of New York or the St. Lawrence. In de­spair, poor Ned went into seclu­sion like Cap­tain Nemo. Con­seil and I no longer left each other.</p>
				<p>As I said, the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i> veered to the east. To be more ac­cu­rate, I should have said to the north­east. Some­times on the sur­face of the waves, some­times be­neath them, the ship wan­dered for days amid these mists so feared by nav­i­ga­tors. Th­ese are caused chiefly by melt­ing ice, which keeps the air ex­tremely damp. How many ships have per­ished in these wa­ter­ways as they tried to get di­rec­tions from the hazy lights on the coast! How many ca­su­al­ties have been caused by these opaque mists! How many col­li­sions have oc­curred with these reefs, where the break­ing surf is cov­ered by the noise of the wind! How many ves­sels have rammed each other, de­spite their run­ning lights, de­spite the warn­ings given by their bo­sun’s pipes and alarm bells!</p>
				<p>So the floor of this sea had the ap­pear­ance of a bat­tle­field where ev­ery ship de­feated by the ocean still lay, some al­ready old and en­crusted, oth­ers newer and re­flect­ing our bea­con light on their iron­work and cop­per un­der­sides. Among these ves­sels, how many went down with all hands, with their crews and hosts of im­mi­grants, at these trou­ble spots so prom­i­nent in the sta­tis­tics: Cape Race, St. Paul Is­land, the Strait of Belle Isle, the St. Lawrence es­tu­ary! And in only a few years, how many vic­tims have been fur­nished to the obit­u­ary no­tices by the Royal Mail, In­man, and Mon­treal lines; by ves­sels named the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Sol­way</i>, the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Isis</i>, the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Para­matta</i>, the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Hun­gar­ian</i>, the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Cana­dian</i>, the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">An­glo-Saxon</i>, the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Hum­boldt</i>, and the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">United States</i>, all run aground; by the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Arc­tic</i> and the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Ly­on­nais</i>, sunk in col­li­sions; by the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Pres­i­dent</i>, the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Pa­cific</i>, and the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">City of Glas­gow</i>, lost for rea­sons un­known; in the midst of their gloomy rub­ble, the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i> nav­i­gated as if pass­ing the dead in re­view!</p>
				<p>By May 15 we were off the south­ern tip of the Grand Banks of New­found­land. Th­ese banks are the re­sult of ma­rine sed­i­men­ta­tion, an ex­ten­sive ac­cu­mu­la­tion of or­ganic waste brought ei­ther from the equa­tor by the Gulf Stream’s cur­rent, or from the North Pole by the coun­ter­cur­rent of cold wa­ter that skirts the Amer­i­can coast. Here, too, er­rat­i­cally drift­ing chunks col­lect from the ice breakup. Here a huge bone­yard forms from fish, mol­lusks, and zoophytes dy­ing over it by the bil­lions.</p>
				<p>The sea is of no great depth at the Grand Banks. A few hun­dred fath­oms at best. But to the south there is a deep, sud­denly oc­cur­ring de­pres­sion, a 3,000-me­ter pit. Here the Gulf Stream widens. Its wa­ters come to full bloom. It loses its speed and tem­per­a­ture, but it turns into a sea.</p>
				<p>Among the fish that the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i> star­tled on its way, I’ll men­tion a one-me­ter lump­fish, black­ish on top with or­ange on the belly and rare among its brethren in that it prac­tices monogamy, a good-sized eelpout, a type of emer­ald moray whose fla­vor is ex­cel­lent, wolff­ish with big eyes in a head some­what re­sem­bling a ca­nine’s, vi­vip­a­rous blennies whose eggs hatch in­side their bod­ies like those of snakes, bloated go­bio (or black gud­geon) mea­sur­ing two decime­ters, grenadiers with long tails and gleam­ing with a sil­very glow, speedy fish ven­tur­ing far from their High Arc­tic seas.</p>
				<p>Our nets also hauled in a bold, dar­ing, vig­or­ous, and mus­cu­lar fish armed with prick­les on its head and stings on its fins, a real scor­pion mea­sur­ing two to three me­ters, the ruth­less en­emy of cod, blennies, and salmon; it was the bull­head of the northerly seas, a fish with red fins and a brown body cov­ered with nod­ules. The <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i>’s fish­er­men had some trou­ble get­ting a grip on this an­i­mal, which, thanks to the for­ma­tion of its gill cov­ers, can pro­tect its res­pi­ra­tory or­gans from any parch­ing con­tact with the air and can live out of wa­ter for a good while.</p>
				<p>And I’ll men­tion—for the record—some lit­tle banded blennies that fol­low ships into the north­ern­most seas, sharp-snouted carp ex­clu­sive to the north At­lantic, scor­pi­onfish, and lastly the <i epub:type="z3998:taxonomy">gadoid</i> fam­ily, chiefly the cod species, which I de­tected in their wa­ters of choice over these in­ex­haustible Grand Banks.</p>
				<p>Be­cause New­found­land is sim­ply an un­der­wa­ter peak, you could call these cod moun­tain fish. While the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i> was clear­ing a path through their tight ranks, Con­seil couldn’t re­frain from mak­ing this com­ment:</p>
				<p>“Mercy, look at these cod!” he said. “Why, I thought cod were flat, like dab or sole!”</p>
				<p>“In­no­cent boy!” I ex­claimed. “Cod are flat only at the gro­cery store, where they’re cut open and spread out on dis­play. But in the wa­ter they’re like mul­let, spin­dle-shaped and per­fectly built for speed.”</p>
				<p>“I can eas­ily be­lieve mas­ter,” Con­seil replied. “But what crowds of them! What swarms!”</p>
				<p>“Bah! My friend, there’d be many more with­out their en­e­mies, scor­pi­onfish and hu­man be­ings! Do you know how many eggs have been counted in a sin­gle fe­male?”</p>
				<p>“I’ll go all out,” Con­seil replied. “500,000.”</p>
				<p>“11,000,000, my friend.”</p>
				<p>“11,000,000! I refuse to ac­cept that un­til I count them my­self.”</p>
				<p>“So count them, Con­seil. But it would be less work to be­lieve me. Be­sides, French­men, English­men, Amer­i­cans, Danes, and Nor­we­gians catch these cod by the thou­sands. They’re eaten in prodi­gious quan­ti­ties, and with­out the as­ton­ish­ing fer­til­ity of these fish, the seas would soon be de­pop­u­lated of them. Ac­cord­ingly, in Eng­land and Amer­ica alone, 5,000 ships manned by 75,000 sea­men go af­ter cod. Each ship brings back an av­er­age catch of 4,400 fish, mak­ing 22,000,000. Off the coast of Nor­way, the to­tal is the same.”</p>
				<p>“Fine,” Con­seil replied, “I’ll take mas­ter’s word for it. I won’t count them.”</p>
				<p>“Count what?”</p>
				<p>“Those 11,000,000 eggs. But I’ll make one com­ment.”</p>
				<p>“What’s that?”</p>
				<p>“If all their eggs hatched, just four cod­fish could feed Eng­land, Amer­ica, and Nor­way.”</p>
				<p>As we skimmed the depths of the Grand Banks, I could see per­fectly those long fish­ing lines, each armed with 200 hooks, that ev­ery boat dan­gled by the dozens. The lower end of each line dragged the bot­tom by means of a small grap­pling iron, and at the sur­face it was se­cured to the buoy-rope of a cork float. The <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i> had to ma­neu­ver shrewdly in the midst of this un­der­wa­ter spi­der­web.</p>
				<p>But the ship didn’t stay long in these heav­ily trav­eled wa­ter­ways. It went up to about lat­i­tude 42°. This brought it abreast of St. John’s in New­found­land and Heart’s Con­tent, where the At­lantic Cable reaches its end point.</p>
				<p>In­stead of con­tin­u­ing north, the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i> took an east­erly head­ing, as if to go along this plateau on which the tele­graph ca­ble rests, where mul­ti­ple sound­ings have given the con­tours of the ter­rain with the ut­most ac­cu­racy.</p>
				<p>It was on May 17, about 500 miles from Heart’s Con­tent and 2,800 me­ters down, that I spot­ted this ca­ble ly­ing on the seafloor. Con­seil, whom I hadn’t alerted, mis­took it at first for a gi­gan­tic sea snake and was gear­ing up to clas­sify it in his best man­ner. But I en­light­ened the fine lad and let him down gen­tly by giv­ing him var­i­ous de­tails on the lay­ing of this ca­ble.</p>
				<p>The first ca­ble was put down dur­ing the years 1857–1858; but af­ter trans­mit­ting about 400 tele­grams, it went dead. In 1863 en­gi­neers built a new ca­ble that mea­sured 3,400 kilo­me­ters, weighed 4,500 met­ric tons, and was shipped aboard the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Great Eastern</i>. This at­tempt also failed.</p>
				<p>Now then, on May 25 while sub­merged to a depth of 3,836 me­ters, the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i> lay in pre­cisely the lo­cal­ity where this sec­ond ca­ble suf­fered the rup­ture that ru­ined the un­der­tak­ing. It hap­pened 638 miles from the coast of Ire­land. At around two o’clock in the af­ter­noon, all con­tact with Europe broke off. The elec­tri­cians on board de­cided to cut the ca­ble be­fore fish­ing it up, and by eleven o’clock that evening they had re­trieved the dam­aged part. They re­paired the joint and its splice; then the ca­ble was re­sub­merged. But a few days later it snapped again and couldn’t be re­cov­ered from the ocean depths.</p>
				<p>Th­ese Amer­i­cans re­fused to give up. The dar­ing Cyrus Field, who had risked his whole for­tune to pro­mote this un­der­tak­ing, called for a new bond is­sue. It sold out im­me­di­ately. Another ca­ble was put down un­der bet­ter con­di­tions. Its sheaves of con­duct­ing wire were in­su­lated within a gutta-per­cha cov­er­ing, which was pro­tected by a pad­ding of tex­tile ma­te­rial en­closed in a metal sheath. The <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Great Eastern</i> put back to sea on July 13, 1866.</p>
				<p>The op­er­a­tion pro­ceeded apace. Yet there was one hitch. As they grad­u­ally un­rolled this third ca­ble, the elec­tri­cians ob­served on sev­eral oc­ca­sions that some­one had re­cently driven nails into it, try­ing to dam­age its core. Cap­tain An­der­son, his of­fi­cers, and the en­gi­neers put their heads to­gether, then posted a warn­ing that if the cul­prit were de­tected, he would be thrown over­board with­out a trial. After that, these vil­lain­ous at­tempts were not re­peated.</p>
				<p>By July 23 the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Great Eastern</i> was ly­ing no far­ther than 800 kilo­me­ters from New­found­land when it re­ceived tele­graphed news from Ire­land of an armistice signed be­tween Prus­sia and Aus­tria af­ter the Bat­tle of Sadova. Through the mists on the 27th, it sighted the port of Heart’s Con­tent. The un­der­tak­ing had ended hap­pily, and in its first dis­patch, young Amer­ica ad­dressed old Europe with these wise words so rarely un­der­stood: “Glory to God in the high­est, and peace on earth to men of good will.”</p>
				<p>I didn’t ex­pect to find this elec­tric ca­ble in mint con­di­tion, as it looked on leav­ing its place of man­u­fac­ture. The long snake was cov­ered with seashell rub­ble and bristling with foraminifera; a crust of caked gravel pro­tected it from any mol­lusks that might bore into it. It rested serenely, shel­tered from the sea’s mo­tions, un­der a pres­sure fa­vor­able to the trans­mis­sion of that elec­tric spark that goes from Amer­ica to Europe in 32/100 of a sec­ond. This ca­ble will no doubt last in­def­i­nitely be­cause, as ob­servers note, its gutta-per­cha cas­ing is im­proved by a stay in salt wa­ter.</p>
				<p>Be­sides, on this well-cho­sen plateau, the ca­ble never lies at depths that could cause a break. The <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i> fol­lowed it to its low­est reaches, lo­cated 4,431 me­ters down, and even there it rested with­out any stress or strain. Then we re­turned to the lo­cal­ity where the 1863 ac­ci­dent had taken place.</p>
				<p>There the ocean floor formed a val­ley 120 kilo­me­ters wide, into which you could fit Mt. Blanc with­out its sum­mit pok­ing above the sur­face of the waves. This val­ley is closed off to the east by a sheer wall 2,000 me­ters high. We ar­rived there on May 28, and the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i> lay no far­ther than 150 kilo­me­ters from Ire­land.</p>
				<p>Would Cap­tain Nemo head up north and beach us on the Bri­tish Isles? No. Much to my sur­prise, he went back down south and re­turned to Euro­pean seas. As we swung around the Emer­ald Isle, I spot­ted Cape Clear for an in­stant, plus the light­house on Fast­net Rock that guides all those thou­sands of ships set­ting out from Glas­gow or Liver­pool.</p>
				<p>An im­por­tant ques­tion then popped into my head. Would the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i> dare to tackle the English Chan­nel? Ned Land (who promptly reap­peared af­ter we hugged shore) never stopped ques­tion­ing me. What could I an­swer him? Cap­tain Nemo re­mained in­vis­i­ble. After giv­ing the Cana­dian a glimpse of Amer­i­can shores, was he about to show me the coast of France?</p>
				<p>But the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i> kept grav­i­tat­ing south­ward. On May 30, in sight of Land’s End, it passed be­tween the low­er­most tip of Eng­land and the Scilly Is­lands, which it left be­hind to star­board.</p>
				<p>If it was go­ing to en­ter the English Chan­nel, it clearly needed to head east. It did not.</p>
				<p>All day long on May 31, the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i> swept around the sea in a se­ries of cir­cles that had me deeply puz­zled. It seemed to be search­ing for a lo­cal­ity that it had some trou­ble find­ing. At noon Cap­tain Nemo him­self came to take our bear­ings. He didn’t ad­dress a word to me. He looked gloomier than ever. What was fill­ing him with such sad­ness? Was it our prox­im­ity to these Euro­pean shores? Was he re­liv­ing his mem­o­ries of that coun­try he had left be­hind? If so, what did he feel? Re­morse or re­gret? For a good while these thoughts oc­cu­pied my mind, and I had a hunch that fate would soon give away the cap­tain’s se­crets.</p>
				<p>The next day, June 1, the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i> kept to the same tack. It was ob­vi­ously try­ing to lo­cate some pre­cise spot in the ocean. Just as on the day be­fore, Cap­tain Nemo came to take the al­ti­tude of the sun. The sea was smooth, the skies clear. Eight miles to the east, a big steamship was vis­i­ble on the hori­zon line. No flag was flap­ping from the gaff of its fore-and-aft sail, and I couldn’t tell its na­tion­al­ity.</p>
				<p>A few min­utes be­fore the sun passed its zenith, Cap­tain Nemo raised his sex­tant and took his sights with the ut­most pre­ci­sion. The ab­so­lute calm of the waves fa­cil­i­tated this op­er­a­tion. The <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i> lay mo­tion­less, nei­ther rolling nor pitch­ing.</p>
				<p>I was on the plat­form just then. After de­ter­min­ing our po­si­tion, the cap­tain pro­nounced only these words:</p>
				<p>“It’s right here!”</p>
				<p>He went down the hatch. Had he seen that ves­sel change course and seem­ingly head to­ward us? I’m un­able to say.</p>
				<p>I re­turned to the lounge. The hatch closed, and I heard wa­ter hiss­ing in the bal­last tanks. The <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i> be­gan to sink on a ver­ti­cal line, be­cause its pro­pel­ler was in check and no longer fur­nished any for­ward mo­tion.</p>
				<p>Some min­utes later it stopped at a depth of 833 me­ters and came to rest on the seafloor.</p>
				<p>The ceil­ing lights in the lounge then went out, the pan­els opened, and through the win­dows I saw, for a half-mile ra­dius, the sea brightly lit by the bea­con’s rays.</p>
				<p>I looked to port and saw noth­ing but the im­mense­ness of these tran­quil wa­ters.</p>
				<p>To star­board, a prom­i­nent bulge on the sea bot­tom caught my at­ten­tion. You would have thought it was some ruin en­shrouded in a crust of whitened seashells, as if un­der a man­tle of snow. Care­fully ex­am­in­ing this mass, I could iden­tify the swollen out­lines of a ship shorn of its masts, which must have sunk bow first. This ca­su­alty cer­tainly dated from some far-off time. To be so caked with the lime­stone of these wa­ters, this wreck­age must have spent many a year on the ocean floor.</p>
				<p>What ship was this? Why had the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i> come to visit its grave? Was it some­thing other than a mar­itime ac­ci­dent that had dragged this craft un­der the wa­ters?</p>
				<p>I wasn’t sure what to think, but next to me I heard Cap­tain Nemo’s voice slowly say:</p>
				<p>“Orig­i­nally this ship was chris­tened the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Mar­seil­lais</i>. It car­ried sev­enty-four can­nons and was launched in 1762. On Au­gust 13, 1778, com­manded by La Poype-Ver­trieux, it fought valiantly against the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Pre­ston</i>. On July 4, 1779, as a mem­ber of the squadron un­der Ad­mi­ral d’Es­taing, it as­sisted in the cap­ture of the is­land of Gre­nada. On Septem­ber 5, 1781, un­der the Count de Grasse, it took part in the Bat­tle of Ch­e­sa­peake Bay. In 1794 the new Repub­lic of France changed the name of this ship. On April 16 of that same year, it joined the squadron at Brest un­der Rear Ad­mi­ral Vil­laret de Joyeuse, who was en­trusted with es­cort­ing a con­voy of wheat com­ing from Amer­ica un­der the com­mand of Ad­mi­ral Van Sta­bel. In this sec­ond year of the French Revo­lu­tion­ary Cal­en­dar, on the 11th and 12th days in the Month of Pas­ture, this squadron fought an en­counter with English ves­sels. Sir, to­day is June 1, 1868, or the 13th day in the Month of Pas­ture. Seventy-four years ago to the day, at this very spot in lat­i­tude 47° 24′ and lon­gi­tude 17° 28′, this ship sank af­ter a heroic bat­tle; its three masts gone, wa­ter in its hold, a third of its crew out of ac­tion, it pre­ferred to go to the bot­tom with its 356 sea­men rather than sur­ren­der; and with its flag nailed up on the af­ter­deck, it dis­ap­peared be­neath the waves to shouts of ‘Long live the Repub­lic!’ ”</p>
				<p>“This is the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Avenger</i>!” I ex­claimed.</p>
				<p>“Yes, sir! The <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Avenger</i>! A splen­did name!” Cap­tain Nemo mur­mured, cross­ing his arms.</p>
			</section>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
