<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="en-US" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: http://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Chapter 3</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="part-2" epub:type="part">
			<section id="chapter-2-3" epub:type="chapter">
				<h3 epub:type="title">
					<span class="first-child" epub:type="z3998:roman">III</span>
					<span class="epub-type-subtitle" epub:type="subtitle">A Pearl Worth Ten Million</span>
				</h3>
				<p>Night fell. I went to bed. I slept pretty poorly. Man-eaters played a ma­jor role in my dreams. And I found it more or less ap­pro­pri­ate that the French word for shark, <i lang="fr" xml:lang="fr">re­quin</i>, has its lin­guis­tic roots in the word “re­quiem.”</p>
				<p>The next day at four o’clock in the morn­ing, I was awak­ened by the stew­ard whom Cap­tain Nemo had placed ex­pressly at my ser­vice. I got up quickly, dressed, and went into the lounge.</p>
				<p>Cap­tain Nemo was wait­ing for me.</p>
				<p>“Pro­fes­sor Aron­nax,” he said to me, “are you ready to start?”</p>
				<p>“I’m ready.”</p>
				<p>“Kindly fol­low me.”</p>
				<p>“What about my com­pan­ions, cap­tain?”</p>
				<p>“They’ve been alerted and are wait­ing for us.”</p>
				<p>“Aren’t we go­ing to put on our div­ing suits?” I asked.</p>
				<p>“Not yet. I haven’t let the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i> pull too near the coast, and we’re fairly well out from the Man­nar oys­ter­bank. But I have the skiff ready, and it will take us to the ex­act spot where we’ll dis­em­bark, which will save us a pretty long trek. It’s car­ry­ing our div­ing equip­ment, and we’ll suit up just be­fore we be­gin our un­der­wa­ter ex­plor­ing.”</p>
				<p>Cap­tain Nemo took me to the cen­tral com­pan­ion­way whose steps led to the plat­form. Ned and Con­seil were there, en­rap­tured with the “plea­sure trip” get­ting un­der way. Oars in po­si­tion, five of the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i>’s sailors were wait­ing for us aboard the skiff, which was moored along­side. The night was still dark. Lay­ers of clouds cloaked the sky and left only a few stars in view. My eyes flew to the side where land lay, but I saw only a blurred line cov­er­ing three-quar­ters of the hori­zon from south­west to north­west. Go­ing up Cey­lon’s west coast dur­ing the night, the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i> lay west of the bay, or rather that gulf formed by the main­land and Man­nar Is­land. Un­der these dark wa­ters there stretched the bank of shell­fish, an in­ex­haustible field of pearls more than twenty miles long.</p>
				<p>Cap­tain Nemo, Con­seil, Ned Land, and I found seats in the stern of the skiff. The long­boat’s coxswain took the tiller; his four com­pan­ions leaned into their oars; the moor­ings were cast off and we pulled clear.</p>
				<p>The skiff headed south­ward. The oars­men took their time. I watched their strokes vig­or­ously catch the wa­ter, and they al­ways waited ten sec­onds be­fore row­ing again, fol­low­ing the prac­tice used in most navies. While the long­boat coasted, drops of liq­uid flicked from the oars and hit the dark troughs of the waves, pit­ter-pat­ter­ing like splashes of molten lead. Com­ing from well out, a mild swell made the skiff roll gen­tly, and a few crest­ing bil­lows lapped at its bow.</p>
				<p>We were silent. What was Cap­tain Nemo think­ing? Per­haps that this ap­proach­ing shore was too close for com­fort, con­trary to the Cana­dian’s views in which it still seemed too far away. As for Con­seil, he had come along out of sim­ple cu­rios­ity.</p>
				<p>Near 5:30 the first glim­mers of light on the hori­zon de­fined the up­per lines of the coast with greater dis­tinct­ness. Fairly flat to the east, it swelled a lit­tle to­ward the south. Five miles still sep­a­rated it from us, and its beach merged with the misty wa­ters. Between us and the shore, the sea was de­serted. Not a boat, not a diver. Pro­found soli­tude reigned over this gath­er­ing place of pearl fish­er­men. As Cap­tain Nemo had com­mented, we were ar­riv­ing in these wa­ter­ways a month too soon.</p>
				<p>At six o’clock the day broke sud­denly, with that speed unique to trop­i­cal re­gions, which ex­pe­ri­ence no real dawn or dusk. The sun’s rays pierced the cloud cur­tain gath­ered on the east­erly hori­zon, and the ra­di­ant orb rose swiftly.</p>
				<p>I could clearly see the shore, which fea­tured a few sparse trees here and there.</p>
				<p>The skiff ad­vanced to­ward Man­nar Is­land, which curved to the south. Cap­tain Nemo stood up from his thwart and stud­ied the sea.</p>
				<p>At his sig­nal the an­chor was low­ered, but its chain barely ran be­cause the bot­tom lay no more than a me­ter down, and this lo­cal­ity was one of the shal­low­est spots near the bank of shell­fish. In­stantly the skiff wheeled around un­der the ebb tide’s out­bound thrust.</p>
				<p>“Here we are, Pro­fes­sor Aron­nax,” Cap­tain Nemo then said. “You ob­serve this con­fined bay? A month from now in this very place, the nu­mer­ous fish­ing boats of the har­vesters will gather, and these are the wa­ters their divers will ran­sack so dar­ingly. This bay is fe­lic­i­tously laid out for their type of fish­ing. It’s shel­tered from the strong­est winds, and the sea is never very tur­bu­lent here, highly fa­vor­able con­di­tions for div­ing work. Now let’s put on our un­der­wa­ter suits, and we’ll be­gin our stroll.”</p>
				<p>I didn’t re­ply, and while star­ing at these sus­pi­cious waves, I be­gan to put on my heavy aquatic clothes, helped by the long­boat’s sailors. Cap­tain Nemo and my two com­pan­ions suited up as well. None of the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i>’s men were to go with us on this new ex­cur­sion.</p>
				<p>Soon we were im­pris­oned up to the neck in in­dia-rub­ber cloth­ing, and straps fas­tened the air de­vices onto our backs. As for the Ruhmko­rff de­vice, it didn’t seem to be in the pic­ture. Be­fore in­sert­ing my head into its cop­per cap­sule, I com­mented on this to the cap­tain.</p>
				<p>“Our light­ing equip­ment would be use­less to us,” the cap­tain an­swered me. “We won’t be go­ing very deep, and the sun’s rays will be suf­fi­cient to light our way. Be­sides, it’s un­wise to carry elec­tric lanterns un­der these waves. Their bright­ness might un­ex­pect­edly at­tract cer­tain dan­ger­ous oc­cu­pants of these wa­ter­ways.”</p>
				<p>As Cap­tain Nemo pro­nounced these words, I turned to Con­seil and Ned Land. But my two friends had al­ready en­cased their cra­ni­ums in their metal head­gear, and they could nei­ther hear nor re­ply.</p>
				<p>I had one ques­tion left to ad­dress to Cap­tain Nemo.</p>
				<p>“What about our weapons?” I asked him. “Our ri­fles?”</p>
				<p>“Ri­fles! What for? Don’t your moun­taineers at­tack bears dag­ger in hand? And isn’t steel surer than lead? Here’s a sturdy blade. Slip it un­der your belt and let’s be off.”</p>
				<p>I stared at my com­pan­ions. They were armed in the same fash­ion, and Ned Land was also bran­dish­ing an enor­mous har­poon he had stowed in the skiff be­fore leav­ing the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i>.</p>
				<p>Then, fol­low­ing the cap­tain’s ex­am­ple, I let my­self be crowned with my heavy cop­per sphere, and our air tanks im­me­di­ately went into ac­tion.</p>
				<p>An in­stant later, the long­boat’s sailors helped us over­board one af­ter the other, and we set foot on level sand in a me­ter and a half of wa­ter. Cap­tain Nemo gave us a hand sig­nal. We fol­lowed him down a gen­tle slope and dis­ap­peared un­der the waves.</p>
				<p>There the ob­ses­sive fears in my brain left me. I be­came sur­pris­ingly calm again. The ease with which I could move in­creased my con­fi­dence, and the many strange sights cap­ti­vated my imag­i­na­tion.</p>
				<p>The sun was al­ready send­ing suf­fi­cient light un­der these waves. The tini­est ob­jects re­mained vis­i­ble. After ten min­utes of walk­ing, we were in five me­ters of wa­ter, and the ter­rain had be­come al­most flat.</p>
				<p>Like a covey of snipe over a marsh, there rose un­der­foot schools of un­usual fish from the genus <i epub:type="z3998:taxonomy">Monopterus</i>, whose mem­bers have no fin but their tail. I rec­og­nized the Ja­vanese eel, a gen­uine eight-decime­ter ser­pent with a bluish gray belly, which, with­out the gold lines over its flanks, could eas­ily be con­fused with the con­ger eel. From the but­ter­fish genus, whose oval bod­ies are very flat, I ob­served sev­eral adorned in bril­liant col­ors and sport­ing a dor­sal fin like a sickle, ed­i­ble fish that, when dried and mar­i­nated, make an ex­cel­lent dish known by the name “karawade”; then some sea poach­ers, fish be­long­ing to the genus <i epub:type="z3998:taxonomy">Aspi­dophoroides</i>, whose bod­ies are cov­ered with scaly ar­mor di­vided into eight length­wise sec­tions.</p>
				<p>Mean­while, as the sun got pro­gres­sively higher, it lit up the wa­tery mass more and more. The seafloor changed lit­tle by lit­tle. Its fine-grained sand was fol­lowed by a gen­uine cause­way of smooth crags cov­ered by a car­pet of mol­lusks and zoophytes. Among other spec­i­mens in these two branches, I noted some win­dow­pane oys­ters with thin valves of un­equal size, a type of os­tra­cod unique to the Red Sea and the In­dian Ocean, then or­ange-hued lu­cina with cir­cu­lar shells, awl-shaped auger shells, some of those Per­sian murex snails that sup­ply the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i> with such won­der­ful dye, spiky peri­win­kles fif­teen cen­time­ters long that rose un­der the waves like hands ready to grab you, tur­ban snails with shells made of horn and bristling all over with spines, lamp shells, ed­i­ble duck clams that feed the Hindu mar­ket­place, sub­tly lu­mi­nous jel­ly­fish of the species <i epub:type="z3998:taxonomy">Pe­la­gia panopyra</i>, and fi­nally some won­der­ful <i epub:type="z3998:taxonomy">Oculina fla­bel­li­forma</i>, mag­nif­i­cent sea fans that fash­ion one of the most lux­u­ri­ant tree forms in this ocean.</p>
				<p>In the midst of this mov­ing veg­e­ta­tion, un­der ar­bors of wa­ter plants, there raced le­gions of clumsy ar­tic­u­lates, in par­tic­u­lar some fanged frog crabs whose cara­paces form a slightly rounded tri­an­gle, rob­ber crabs ex­clu­sive to these wa­ter­ways, and hor­ri­ble parthenope crabs whose ap­pear­ance was re­pul­sive to the eye. One an­i­mal no less hideous, which I en­coun­tered sev­eral times, was the enor­mous crab that Mr. Dar­win ob­served, to which na­ture has given the in­stinct and req­ui­site strength to eat co­conuts; it scram­bles up trees on the beach and sends the co­conuts tum­bling; they frac­ture in their fall and are opened by its pow­er­ful pin­cers. Here, un­der these clear waves, this crab raced around with match­less agility, while green tur­tles from the species fre­quent­ing the Mal­abar coast moved slug­gishly among the crum­bling rocks.</p>
				<p>Near seven o’clock we fi­nally sur­veyed the bank of shell­fish, where pearl oys­ters re­pro­duce by the mil­lions. Th­ese valu­able mol­lusks stick to rocks, where they’re strongly at­tached by a mass of brown fil­a­ments that for­bids their mov­ing about. In this re­spect oys­ters are in­fe­rior even to mus­sels, to whom na­ture has not de­nied all tal­ent for lo­co­mo­tion.</p>
				<p>The shell­fish Me­lea­g­rina, that womb for pearls whose valves are nearly equal in size, has the shape of a round shell with thick walls and a very rough ex­te­rior. Some of these shells were fur­rowed with flaky, green­ish bands that ra­di­ated down from the top. Th­ese were the young oys­ters. The oth­ers had rugged black sur­faces, mea­sured up to fif­teen cen­time­ters in width, and were ten or more years old.</p>
				<p>Cap­tain Nemo pointed to this prodi­gious heap of shell­fish, and I saw that these mines were gen­uinely in­ex­haustible, since na­ture’s cre­ative pow­ers are greater than man’s de­struc­tive in­stincts. True to those in­stincts, Ned Land greed­ily stuffed the finest of these mol­lusks into a net he car­ried at his side.</p>
				<p>But we couldn’t stop. We had to fol­low the cap­tain, who headed down trails seem­ingly known only to him­self. The seafloor rose no­tice­ably, and when I lifted my arms, some­times they would pass above the sur­face of the sea. Then the level of the oys­ter­bank would lower un­pre­dictably. Often we went around tall, pointed rocks ris­ing like pyra­mids. In their dark crevices huge crus­taceans, aim­ing their long legs like heavy ar­tillery, watched us with un­blink­ing eyes, while un­der­foot there crept mil­li­pedes, blood­worms, ari­cia worms, and an­nelid worms, whose an­ten­nas and tubu­lar ten­ta­cles were in­cred­i­bly long.</p>
				<p>Just then a huge cave opened up in our path, hol­lowed from a pic­turesque pile of rocks whose smooth heights were com­pletely hung with un­der­wa­ter flora. At first this cave looked pitch-black to me. In­side, the sun’s rays seemed to di­min­ish by de­grees. Their hazy trans­parency was noth­ing more than drowned light.</p>
				<p>Cap­tain Nemo went in. We fol­lowed him. My eyes soon grew ac­cus­tomed to this com­par­a­tive gloom. I dis­tin­guished the un­pre­dictably con­toured spring­ings of a vault, sup­ported by nat­u­ral pil­lars firmly based on a gran­ite foun­da­tion, like the weighty col­umns of Tus­can ar­chi­tec­ture. Why had our in­com­pre­hen­si­ble guide taken us into the depths of this un­der­wa­ter crypt? I would soon find out.</p>
				<p>After go­ing down a fairly steep slope, our feet trod the floor of a sort of cir­cu­lar pit. There Cap­tain Nemo stopped, and his hand in­di­cated an ob­ject that I hadn’t yet no­ticed.</p>
				<p>It was an oys­ter of ex­tra­or­di­nary di­men­sions, a ti­tanic gi­ant clam, a holy-wa­ter font that could have held a whole lake, a basin more than two me­ters wide, hence even big­ger than the one adorn­ing the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i>’s lounge.</p>
				<p>I ap­proached this phe­nom­e­nal mol­lusk. Its mass of fil­a­ments at­tached it to a ta­ble of gran­ite, and there it grew by it­self in the midst of the cave’s calm wa­ters. I es­ti­mated the weight of this gi­ant clam at 300 kilo­grams. Hence such an oys­ter held fif­teen ki­los of meat, and you’d need the stom­ach of King Gar­gan­tua to eat a cou­ple dozen.</p>
				<p>Cap­tain Nemo was ob­vi­ously fa­mil­iar with this bi­valve’s ex­is­tence. This wasn’t the first time he’d paid it a visit, and I thought his sole rea­son for lead­ing us to this lo­cal­ity was to show us a nat­u­ral cu­rios­ity. I was mis­taken. Cap­tain Nemo had an ex­plicit per­sonal in­ter­est in check­ing on the cur­rent con­di­tion of this gi­ant clam.</p>
				<p>The mol­lusk’s two valves were partly open. The cap­tain ap­proached and stuck his dag­ger ver­ti­cally be­tween the shells to dis­cour­age any ideas about clos­ing; then with his hands he raised the fringed, mem­brane-filled tu­nic that made up the an­i­mal’s man­tle.</p>
				<p>There, be­tween its leaflike folds, I saw a loose pearl as big as a co­conut. Its glob­u­lar shape, per­fect clar­ity, and won­der­ful ori­ent made it a jewel of in­cal­cu­la­ble value. Car­ried away by cu­rios­ity, I stretched out my hand to take it, weigh it, fon­dle it! But the cap­tain stopped me, sig­naled no, re­moved his dag­ger in one swift mo­tion, and let the two valves snap shut.</p>
				<p>I then un­der­stood Cap­tain Nemo’s in­tent. By leav­ing the pearl buried be­neath the gi­ant clam’s man­tle, he al­lowed it to grow im­per­cep­ti­bly. With each pass­ing year the mol­lusk’s se­cre­tions added new con­cen­tric lay­ers. The cap­tain alone was fa­mil­iar with the cave where this won­der­ful fruit of na­ture was “ripen­ing”; he alone reared it, so to speak, in or­der to trans­fer it one day to his dearly beloved mu­seum. Per­haps, fol­low­ing the ex­am­ples of oys­ter farm­ers in China and In­dia, he had even pre­de­ter­mined the cre­ation of this pearl by stick­ing un­der the mol­lusk’s folds some piece of glass or metal that was grad­u­ally cov­ered with mother-of-pearl. In any case, com­par­ing this pearl to oth­ers I al­ready knew about, and to those shim­mer­ing in the cap­tain’s col­lec­tion, I es­ti­mated that it was worth at least 10,000,000 francs. It was a su­perb nat­u­ral cu­rios­ity rather than a lux­u­ri­ous piece of jew­elry, be­cause I don’t know of any fe­male ear that could han­dle it.</p>
				<p>Our visit to this op­u­lent gi­ant clam came to an end. Cap­tain Nemo left the cave, and we climbed back up the bank of shell­fish in the midst of these clear wa­ters not yet dis­turbed by divers at work.</p>
				<p>We walked by our­selves, gen­uine loi­ter­ers stop­ping or stray­ing as our fan­cies dic­tated. For my part, I was no longer wor­ried about those dan­gers my imag­i­na­tion had so ridicu­lously ex­ag­ger­ated. The shal­lows drew no­tice­ably closer to the sur­face of the sea, and soon, walk­ing in only a me­ter of wa­ter, my head passed well above the level of the ocean. Con­seil re­joined me, and glu­ing his huge cop­per cap­sule to mine, his eyes gave me a friendly greet­ing. But this lofty plateau mea­sured only a few fath­oms, and soon we reen­tered Our Ele­ment. I think I’ve now earned the right to dub it that.</p>
				<p>Ten min­utes later, Cap­tain Nemo stopped sud­denly. I thought he’d called a halt so that we could turn and start back. No. With a ges­ture he or­dered us to crouch be­side him at the foot of a wide crevice. His hand mo­tioned to­ward a spot within the liq­uid mass, and I looked care­fully.</p>
				<p>Five me­ters away a shadow ap­peared and dropped to the seafloor. The alarm­ing idea of sharks crossed my mind. But I was mis­taken, and once again we didn’t have to deal with mon­sters of the deep.</p>
				<p>It was a man, a liv­ing man, a black In­dian fish­er­man, a poor devil who no doubt had come to gather what he could be­fore har­vest time. I saw the bot­tom of his dinghy, moored a few feet above his head. He would dive and go back up in quick suc­ces­sion. A stone cut in the shape of a sugar loaf, which he gripped be­tween his feet while a rope con­nected it to his boat, served to lower him more quickly to the ocean floor. This was the ex­tent of his equip­ment. Ar­riv­ing on the seafloor at a depth of about five me­ters, he fell to his knees and stuffed his sack with shell­fish gath­ered at ran­dom. Then he went back up, emp­tied his sack, pulled up his stone, and started all over again, the whole process last­ing only thirty sec­onds.</p>
				<p>This diver didn’t see us. A shadow cast by our crag hid us from his view. And be­sides, how could this poor In­dian ever have guessed that hu­man be­ings, crea­tures like him­self, were near him un­der the wa­ters, eaves­drop­ping on his move­ments, not miss­ing a sin­gle de­tail of his fish­ing!</p>
				<p>So he went up and down sev­eral times. He gath­ered only about ten shell­fish per dive, be­cause he had to tear them from the banks where each clung with its tough mass of fil­a­ments. And how many of these oys­ters for which he risked his life would have no pearl in them!</p>
				<p>I ob­served him with great care. His move­ments were sys­tem­at­i­cally ex­e­cuted, and for half an hour no dan­ger seemed to threaten him. So I had got­ten used to the sight of this fas­ci­nat­ing fish­ing when all at once, just as the In­dian was kneel­ing on the seafloor, I saw him make a fright­ened ges­ture, stand, and gather him­self to spring back to the sur­face of the waves.</p>
				<p>I un­der­stood his fear. A gi­gan­tic shadow ap­peared above the poor diver. It was a shark of huge size, mov­ing in di­ag­o­nally, eyes ablaze, jaws wide open!</p>
				<p>I was speech­less with hor­ror, un­able to make a sin­gle move­ment.</p>
				<p>With one vig­or­ous stroke of its fins, the vo­ra­cious an­i­mal shot to­ward the In­dian, who jumped aside and avoided the shark’s bite but not the thrash­ing of its tail, be­cause that tail struck him across the chest and stretched him out on the seafloor.</p>
				<p>This scene lasted barely a few sec­onds. The shark re­turned, rolled over on its back, and was get­ting ready to cut the In­dian in half, when Cap­tain Nemo, who was sta­tioned be­side me, sud­denly stood up. Then he strode right to­ward the mon­ster, dag­ger in hand, ready to fight it at close quar­ters.</p>
				<p>Just as it was about to snap up the poor fish­er­man, the man-eater saw its new ad­ver­sary, repo­si­tioned it­self on its belly, and headed swiftly to­ward him.</p>
				<p>I can see Cap­tain Nemo’s bear­ing to this day. Brac­ing him­self, he waited for the fear­some man-eater with won­der­ful com­po­sure, and when the lat­ter rushed at him, the cap­tain leaped aside with prodi­gious quick­ness, avoided a col­li­sion, and sank his dag­ger into its belly. But that wasn’t the end of the story. A dread­ful bat­tle was joined.</p>
				<p>The shark bel­lowed, so to speak. Blood was pour­ing into the waves from its wounds. The sea was dyed red, and through this opaque liq­uid I could see noth­ing else.</p>
				<p>Noth­ing else un­til the mo­ment when, through a rift in the clouds, I saw the dar­ing cap­tain cling­ing to one of the an­i­mal’s fins, fight­ing the mon­ster at close quar­ters, be­la­bor­ing his en­emy’s belly with stabs of the dag­ger yet un­able to de­liver the de­cid­ing thrust, in other words, a di­rect hit to the heart. In its strug­gles the man-eater churned the wa­tery mass so fu­ri­ously, its ed­dies threat­ened to knock me over.</p>
				<p>I wanted to run to the cap­tain’s res­cue. But I was trans­fixed with hor­ror, un­able to move.</p>
				<p>I stared, wild-eyed. I saw the fight en­ter a new phase. The cap­tain fell to the seafloor, top­pled by the enor­mous mass weigh­ing him down. Then the shark’s jaws opened as­tound­ingly wide, like a pair of in­dus­trial shears, and that would have been the fin­ish of Cap­tain Nemo had not Ned Land, quick as thought, rushed for­ward with his har­poon and driven its dread­ful point into the shark’s un­der­side.</p>
				<p>The waves were sat­u­rated with masses of blood. The wa­ters shook with the move­ments of the man-eater, which thrashed about with in­de­scrib­able fury. Ned Land hadn’t missed his tar­get. This was the mon­ster’s death rat­tle. Pierced to the heart, it was strug­gling with dread­ful spasms whose af­ter­shocks knocked Con­seil off his feet.</p>
				<p>Mean­while Ned Land pulled the cap­tain clear. Un­in­jured, the lat­ter stood up, went right to the In­dian, quickly cut the rope bind­ing the man to his stone, took the fel­low in his arms, and with a vig­or­ous kick of the heel, rose to the sur­face of the sea.</p>
				<p>The three of us fol­lowed him, and a few mo­ments later, mirac­u­lously safe, we reached the fish­er­man’s long­boat.</p>
				<p>Cap­tain Nemo’s first con­cern was to re­vive this un­for­tu­nate man. I wasn’t sure he would suc­ceed. I hoped so, since the poor devil hadn’t been un­der very long. But that stroke from the shark’s tail could have been his death­blow.</p>
				<p>For­tu­nately, af­ter vig­or­ous mas­sag­ing by Con­seil and the cap­tain, I saw the nearly drowned man re­gain con­scious­ness lit­tle by lit­tle. He opened his eyes. How star­tled he must have felt, how fright­ened even, at see­ing four huge, cop­per cra­ni­ums lean­ing over him!</p>
				<p>And above all, what must he have thought when Cap­tain Nemo pulled a bag of pearls from a pocket in his div­ing suit and placed it in the fish­er­man’s hands? This mag­nif­i­cent bene­fac­tion from the Man of the Waters to the poor In­dian from Cey­lon was ac­cepted by the lat­ter with trem­bling hands. His be­wil­dered eyes in­di­cated that he didn’t know to what su­per­hu­man crea­tures he owed both his life and his for­tune.</p>
				<p>At the cap­tain’s sig­nal we re­turned to the bank of shell­fish, and re­trac­ing our steps, we walked for half an hour un­til we en­coun­tered the an­chor con­nect­ing the seafloor with the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i>’s skiff.</p>
				<p>Back on board, the sailors helped di­vest us of our heavy cop­per cara­paces.</p>
				<p>Cap­tain Nemo’s first words were spo­ken to the Cana­dian.</p>
				<p>“Thank you, Mr. Land,” he told him.</p>
				<p>“Tit for tat, cap­tain,” Ned Land replied. “I owed it to you.”</p>
				<p>The ghost of a smile glided across the cap­tain’s lips, and that was all.</p>
				<p>“To the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i>,” he said.</p>
				<p>The long­boat flew over the waves. A few min­utes later we en­coun­tered the shark’s corpse again, float­ing.</p>
				<p>From the black mark­ings on the tips of its fins, I rec­og­nized the dread­ful <i epub:type="z3998:taxonomy">Squalus melanopterus</i> from the seas of the East Indies, a va­ri­ety in the species of sharks proper. It was more than twenty-five feet long; its enor­mous mouth oc­cu­pied a third of its body. It was an adult, as could be seen from the six rows of teeth form­ing an isosce­les tri­an­gle in its up­per jaw.</p>
				<p>Con­seil looked at it with purely sci­en­tific fas­ci­na­tion, and I’m sure he placed it, not with­out good rea­son, in the class of car­ti­lagi­nous fish, or­der <i epub:type="z3998:taxonomy">Chon­droptery­gia</i> with fixed gills, fam­ily <i epub:type="z3998:taxonomy">Sela­cia</i>, genus <i epub:type="z3998:taxonomy">Squalus</i>.</p>
				<p>While I was con­tem­plat­ing this in­ert mass, sud­denly a dozen of these vo­ra­cious <i epub:type="z3998:taxonomy">melanoptera</i> ap­peared around our long­boat; but, pay­ing no at­ten­tion to us, they pounced on the corpse and quar­reled over ev­ery scrap of it.</p>
				<p>By 8:30 we were back on board the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i>.</p>
				<p>There I fell to think­ing about the in­ci­dents that marked our ex­cur­sion over the Man­nar oys­ter­bank. Two im­pres­sions in­evitably stood out. One con­cerned Cap­tain Nemo’s match­less brav­ery, the other his de­vo­tion to a hu­man be­ing, a rep­re­sen­ta­tive of that race from which he had fled be­neath the seas. In spite of ev­ery­thing, this strange man hadn’t yet suc­ceeded in com­pletely sti­fling his heart.</p>
				<p>When I shared these im­pres­sions with him, he an­swered me in a tone touched with emo­tion:</p>
				<p>“That In­dian, pro­fes­sor, lives in the land of the op­pressed, and I am to this day, and will be un­til my last breath, a na­tive of that same land!”</p>
			</section>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
