<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="en-US" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: http://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Chapter 13</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="part-1" epub:type="part">
			<section id="chapter-1-13" epub:type="chapter">
				<h3 epub:type="title">
					<span class="first-child" epub:type="z3998:roman">XIII</span>
					<span class="epub-type-subtitle" epub:type="subtitle">Some Figures</span>
				</h3>
				<p>A mo­ment later we were seated on a couch in the lounge, cigars be­tween our lips. The cap­tain placed be­fore my eyes a work­ing draw­ing that gave the ground plan, cross sec­tion, and side view of the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i>. Then he be­gan his de­scrip­tion as fol­lows:</p>
				<p>“Here, Pro­fes­sor Aron­nax, are the dif­fer­ent di­men­sions of this boat now trans­port­ing you. It’s a very long cylin­der with con­i­cal ends. It no­tice­ably takes the shape of a cigar, a shape al­ready adopted in Lon­don for sev­eral projects of the same kind. The length of this cylin­der from end to end is ex­actly sev­enty me­ters, and its max­i­mum breadth of beam is eight me­ters. So it isn’t quite built on the ten-to-one ra­tio of your high-speed steam­ers; but its lines are suf­fi­ciently long, and their ta­per­ing grad­ual enough, so that the dis­placed wa­ter eas­ily slips past and poses no ob­sta­cle to the ship’s move­ments.</p>
				<p>“Th­ese two di­men­sions al­low you to ob­tain, via a sim­ple cal­cu­la­tion, the sur­face area and vol­ume of the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i>. Its sur­face area to­tals 1,011.45 square me­ters, its vol­ume 1,507.2 cu­bic me­ters—which is tan­ta­mount to say­ing that when it’s com­pletely sub­merged, it dis­places 1,500 cu­bic me­ters of wa­ter, or weighs 1,500 met­ric tons.</p>
				<p>“In draw­ing up plans for a ship meant to nav­i­gate un­der­wa­ter, I wanted it, when float­ing on the waves, to lie nine-tenths be­low the sur­face and to emerge only one-tenth. Con­se­quently, un­der these con­di­tions it needed to dis­place only nine-tenths of its vol­ume, hence 1,356.48 cu­bic me­ters; in other words, it was to weigh only that same num­ber of met­ric tons. So I was obliged not to ex­ceed this weight while build­ing it to the afore­said di­men­sions.</p>
				<p>“The <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i> is made up of two hulls, one in­side the other; be­tween them, join­ing them to­gether, are iron T-bars that give this ship the ut­most rigid­ity. In fact, thanks to this cel­lu­lar ar­range­ment, it has the re­sis­tance of a stone block, as if it were com­pletely solid. Its plat­ing can’t give way; it’s self-ad­her­ing and not de­pen­dent on the tight­ness of its riv­ets; and due to the per­fect union of its ma­te­ri­als, the sol­i­dar­ity of its con­struc­tion al­lows it to defy the most vi­o­lent seas.</p>
				<p>“The two hulls are man­u­fac­tured from boil­er­plate steel, whose rel­a­tive den­sity is 7.8 times that of wa­ter. The first hull has a thick­ness of no less than five cen­time­ters and weighs 394.96 met­ric tons. My sec­ond hull, the outer cover, in­cludes a keel fifty cen­time­ters high by twenty-five wide, which by it­self weighs 62 met­ric tons; this hull, the en­gine, the bal­last, the var­i­ous ac­ces­sories and ac­com­mo­da­tions, plus the bulk­heads and in­te­rior braces, have a com­bined weight of 961.52 met­ric tons, which when added to 394.96 met­ric tons, gives us the de­sired to­tal of 1,356.48 met­ric tons. Clear?”</p>
				<p>“Clear,” I replied.</p>
				<p>“So,” the cap­tain went on, “when the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i> lies on the waves un­der these con­di­tions, one-tenth of it does emerge above wa­ter. Now then, if I pro­vide some bal­last tanks equal in ca­pac­ity to that one-tenth, hence able to hold 150.72 met­ric tons, and if I fill them with wa­ter, the boat then dis­places 1,507.2 met­ric tons—or it weighs that much—and it would be com­pletely sub­merged. That’s what comes about, pro­fes­sor. Th­ese bal­last tanks ex­ist within easy ac­cess in the lower reaches of the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i>. I open some stop­cocks, the tanks fill, the boat sinks, and it’s ex­actly flush with the sur­face of the wa­ter.”</p>
				<p>“Fine, cap­tain, but now we come to a gen­uine dif­fi­culty. You’re able to lie flush with the sur­face of the ocean, that I un­der­stand. But lower down, while div­ing be­neath that sur­face, isn’t your sub­mersible go­ing to en­counter a pres­sure, and con­se­quently un­dergo an up­ward thrust, that must be as­sessed at one at­mos­phere per ev­ery thirty feet of wa­ter, hence at about one kilo­gram per each square cen­time­ter?”</p>
				<p>“Pre­cisely, sir.”</p>
				<p>“Then un­less you fill up the whole <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i>, I don’t see how you can force it down into the heart of these liq­uid masses.”</p>
				<p>“Pro­fes­sor,” Cap­tain Nemo replied, “static ob­jects mustn’t be con­fused with dy­namic ones, or we’ll be open to se­ri­ous er­ror. Com­par­a­tively lit­tle ef­fort is spent in reach­ing the ocean’s lower re­gions, be­cause all ob­jects have a ten­dency to be­come ‘sinkers.’ Fol­low my logic here.”</p>
				<p>“I’m all ears, cap­tain.”</p>
				<p>“When I wanted to de­ter­mine what in­crease in weight the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i> needed to be given in or­der to sub­merge, I had only to take note of the pro­por­tion­ate re­duc­tion in vol­ume that salt wa­ter ex­pe­ri­ences in deeper and deeper strata.”</p>
				<p>“That’s ob­vi­ous,” I replied.</p>
				<p>“Now then, if wa­ter isn’t ab­so­lutely in­com­press­ible, at least it com­presses very lit­tle. In fact, ac­cord­ing to the most re­cent cal­cu­la­tions, this re­duc­tion is only .0000436 per at­mos­phere, or per ev­ery thirty feet of depth. For in­stance, to go 1,000 me­ters down, I must take into ac­count the re­duc­tion in vol­ume that oc­curs un­der a pres­sure equiv­a­lent to that from a 1,000-me­ter col­umn of wa­ter, in other words, un­der a pres­sure of 100 at­mos­pheres. In this in­stance the re­duc­tion would be .00436. Con­se­quently, I’d have to in­crease my weight from 1,507.2 met­ric tons to 1,513.77. So the added weight would only be 6.57 met­ric tons.”</p>
				<p>“That’s all?”</p>
				<p>“That’s all, Pro­fes­sor Aron­nax, and the cal­cu­la­tion is easy to check. Now then, I have sup­ple­men­tary bal­last tanks ca­pa­ble of ship­ping 100 met­ric tons of wa­ter. So I can de­scend to con­sid­er­able depths. When I want to rise again and lie flush with the sur­face, all I have to do is ex­pel that wa­ter; and if I de­sire that the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i> emerge above the waves to one-tenth of its to­tal ca­pac­ity, I empty all the bal­last tanks com­pletely.”</p>
				<p>This logic, backed up by fig­ures, left me with­out a sin­gle ob­jec­tion.</p>
				<p>“I ac­cept your cal­cu­la­tions, cap­tain,” I replied, “and I’d be ill-man­nered to dis­pute them, since your daily ex­pe­ri­ence bears them out. But at this junc­ture, I have a hunch that we’re still left with one real dif­fi­culty.”</p>
				<p>“What’s that, sir?”</p>
				<p>“When you’re at a depth of 1,000 me­ters, the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i>’s plat­ing bears a pres­sure of 100 at­mos­pheres. If at this point you want to empty the sup­ple­men­tary bal­last tanks in or­der to lighten your boat and rise to the sur­face, your pumps must over­come that pres­sure of 100 at­mos­pheres, which is 100 kilo­grams per each square cen­time­ter. This de­mands a strength—”</p>
				<p>“That elec­tric­ity alone can give me,” Cap­tain Nemo said swiftly. “Sir, I re­peat: the dy­namic power of my en­gines is nearly in­fi­nite. The <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i>’s pumps have prodi­gious strength, as you must have no­ticed when their wa­ter­spouts swept like a tor­rent over the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Abra­ham Lin­coln</i>. Be­sides, I use my sup­ple­men­tary bal­last tanks only to reach an av­er­age depth of 1,500 to 2,000 me­ters, and that with a view to con­serv­ing my ma­chin­ery. Ac­cord­ingly, when I have a mind to visit the ocean depths two or three ver­ti­cal leagues be­neath the sur­face, I use ma­neu­vers that are more time-con­sum­ing but no less in­fal­li­ble.”</p>
				<p>“What are they, cap­tain?” I asked.</p>
				<p>“Here I’m nat­u­rally led into telling you how the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i> is ma­neu­vered.”</p>
				<p>“I can’t wait to find out.”</p>
				<p>“In or­der to steer this boat to port or star­board, in short, to make turns on a hor­i­zon­tal plane, I use an or­di­nary, wide-bladed rud­der that’s fas­tened to the rear of the stern­post and worked by a wheel and tackle. But I can also move the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i> up­ward and down­ward on a ver­ti­cal plane by the sim­ple method of slant­ing its two fins, which are at­tached to its sides at its cen­ter of flota­tion; these fins are flex­i­ble, able to as­sume any po­si­tion, and can be op­er­ated from in­side by means of pow­er­ful levers. If these fins stay par­al­lel with the boat, the lat­ter moves hor­i­zon­tally. If they slant, the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i> fol­lows the an­gle of that slant and, un­der its pro­pel­ler’s thrust, ei­ther sinks on a di­ag­o­nal as steep as it suits me, or rises on that di­ag­o­nal. And sim­i­larly, if I want to re­turn more swiftly to the sur­face, I throw the pro­pel­ler in gear, and the wa­ter’s pres­sure makes the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i> rise ver­ti­cally, as an air bal­loon in­flated with hy­dro­gen lifts swiftly into the skies.”</p>
				<p>“Bravo, cap­tain!” I ex­claimed. “But in the midst of the wa­ters, how can your helms­man fol­low the course you’ve given him?”</p>
				<p>“My helms­man is sta­tioned be­hind the win­dows of a pi­lot­house, which pro­trudes from the top­side of the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i>’s hull and is fit­ted with bi­con­vex glass.”</p>
				<p>“Is glass ca­pa­ble of re­sist­ing such pres­sures?”</p>
				<p>“Per­fectly ca­pa­ble. Though frag­ile on im­pact, crys­tal can still of­fer con­sid­er­able re­sis­tance. In 1864, dur­ing ex­per­i­ments on fish­ing by elec­tric light in the mid­dle of the North Sea, glass panes less than seven mil­lime­ters thick were seen to re­sist a pres­sure of six­teen at­mos­pheres, all the while let­ting through strong, heat-gen­er­at­ing rays whose warmth was un­evenly dis­trib­uted. Now then, I use glass win­dows mea­sur­ing no less than twenty-one cen­time­ters at their cen­ters; in other words, they’ve thirty times the thick­ness.”</p>
				<p>“Fair enough, cap­tain, but if we’re go­ing to see, we need light to drive away the dark, and in the midst of the murky wa­ters, I won­der how your helms­man can—”</p>
				<p>“Set astern of the pi­lot­house is a pow­er­ful elec­tric re­flec­tor whose rays light up the sea for a dis­tance of half a mile.”</p>
				<p>“Oh, bravo! Bravo three times over, cap­tain! That ex­plains the phos­pho­res­cent glow from this so-called nar­whale that so puz­zled us sci­en­tists! Perti­nent to this, I’ll ask you if the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i>’s run­ning afoul of the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Sco­tia</i>, which caused such a great up­roar, was the re­sult of an ac­ci­den­tal en­counter?”</p>
				<p>“En­tirely ac­ci­den­tal, sir. I was nav­i­gat­ing two me­ters be­neath the sur­face of the wa­ter when the col­li­sion oc­curred. How­ever, I could see that it had no dire con­se­quences.”</p>
				<p>“None, sir. But as for your en­counter with the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Abra­ham Lin­coln</i> … ?”</p>
				<p>“Pro­fes­sor, that trou­bled me, be­cause it’s one of the best ships in the gal­lant Amer­i­can navy, but they at­tacked me and I had to de­fend my­self! All the same, I was con­tent sim­ply to put the frigate in a con­di­tion where it could do me no harm; it won’t have any dif­fi­culty get­ting re­pairs at the near­est port.”</p>
				<p>“Ah, com­man­der,” I ex­claimed with con­vic­tion, “your <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i> is truly a mar­velous boat!”</p>
				<p>“Yes, pro­fes­sor,” Cap­tain Nemo replied with gen­uine ex­cite­ment, “and I love it as if it were my own flesh and blood! Aboard a con­ven­tional ship, fac­ing the ocean’s per­ils, dan­ger lurks ev­ery­where; on the sur­face of the sea, your chief sen­sa­tion is the con­stant feel­ing of an un­der­ly­ing chasm, as the Dutch­man Jansen so aptly put it; but be­low the waves aboard the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i>, your heart never fails you! There are no struc­tural de­for­mi­ties to worry about, be­cause the dou­ble hull of this boat has the rigid­ity of iron; no rig­ging to be worn out by rolling and pitch­ing on the waves; no sails for the wind to carry off; no boil­ers for steam to burst open; no fires to fear, be­cause this sub­mersible is made of sheet iron not wood; no coal to run out of, since elec­tric­ity is its me­chan­i­cal force; no col­li­sions to fear, be­cause it nav­i­gates the wa­tery deep all by it­self; no storms to brave, be­cause just a few me­ters be­neath the waves, it finds ab­so­lute tran­quil­ity! There, sir. There’s the ideal ship! And if it’s true that the en­gi­neer has more con­fi­dence in a craft than the builder, and the builder more than the cap­tain him­self, you can un­der­stand the ut­ter aban­don with which I place my trust in this <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i>, since I’m its cap­tain, builder, and en­gi­neer all in one!”</p>
				<p>Cap­tain Nemo spoke with win­ning elo­quence. The fire in his eyes and the pas­sion in his ges­tures trans­fig­ured him. Yes, he loved his ship the same way a fa­ther loves his child!</p>
				<p>But one ques­tion, per­haps in­dis­creet, nat­u­rally popped up, and I couldn’t re­sist ask­ing it.</p>
				<p>“You’re an en­gi­neer, then, Cap­tain Nemo?”</p>
				<p>“Yes, pro­fes­sor,” he an­swered me. “I stud­ied in Lon­don, Paris, and New York back in the days when I was a res­i­dent of the earth’s con­ti­nents.”</p>
				<p>“But how were you able to build this won­der­ful <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i> in se­cret?”</p>
				<p>“Each part of it, Pro­fes­sor Aron­nax, came from a dif­fer­ent spot on the globe and reached me at a cover ad­dress. Its keel was forged by Creusot in France, its pro­pel­ler shaft by Pen &amp; Co. in Lon­don, the sheet-iron plates for its hull by Laird’s in Liver­pool, its pro­pel­ler by Scott’s in Glas­gow. Its tanks were man­u­fac­tured by Cail &amp; Co. in Paris, its en­gine by Krupp in Prus­sia, its spur by the Mo­tala work­shops in Swe­den, its pre­ci­sion in­stru­ments by Hart Bros. in New York, etc.; and each of these sup­pli­ers re­ceived my spec­i­fi­ca­tions un­der a dif­fer­ent name.”</p>
				<p>“But,” I went on, “once these parts were man­u­fac­tured, didn’t they have to be mounted and ad­justed?”</p>
				<p>“Pro­fes­sor, I set up my work­shops on a de­serted islet in mi­do­cean. There our <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i> was com­pleted by me and my work­men, in other words, by my gal­lant com­pan­ions whom I’ve molded and ed­u­cated. Then, when the op­er­a­tion was over, we burned ev­ery trace of our stay on that islet, which if I could have, I’d have blown up.”</p>
				<p>“From all this, may I as­sume that such a boat costs a for­tune?”</p>
				<p>“An iron ship, Pro­fes­sor Aron­nax, runs 1,125 francs per met­ric ton. Now then, the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i> has a bur­den of 1,500 met­ric tons. Con­se­quently, it cost 1,687,000 francs, hence 2,000,000 francs in­clud­ing its ac­com­mo­da­tions, and 4,000,000 or 5,000,000 with all the col­lec­tions and works of art it con­tains.”</p>
				<p>“One last ques­tion, Cap­tain Nemo.”</p>
				<p>“Ask, pro­fes­sor.”</p>
				<p>“You’re rich, then?”</p>
				<p>“In­finitely rich, sir, and with­out any trou­ble, I could pay off the ten-bil­lion-franc French na­tional debt!”</p>
				<p>I gaped at the bizarre in­di­vid­ual who had just spo­ken these words. Was he play­ing on my credulity? Time would tell.</p>
			</section>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
