<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="en-US" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: http://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Chapter 23</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="part-2" epub:type="part">
			<section id="chapter-2-23" epub:type="chapter">
				<h3 epub:type="title">
					<span class="first-child" epub:type="z3998:roman">XXIII</span>
					<span class="epub-type-subtitle" epub:type="subtitle">Conclusion</span>
				</h3>
				<p>We come to the con­clu­sion of this voy­age un­der the seas. What hap­pened that night, how the skiff es­caped from the Mael­strom’s fear­some ed­dies, how Ned Land, Con­seil, and I got out of that whirlpool, I’m un­able to say. But when I re­gained con­scious­ness, I was ly­ing in a fish­er­man’s hut on one of the Lo­foten Is­lands. My two com­pan­ions, safe and sound, were at my bed­side clasp­ing my hands. We em­braced each other heartily.</p>
				<p>Just now we can’t even dream of re­turn­ing to France. Travel be­tween up­per Nor­way and the south is lim­ited. So I have to wait for the ar­rival of a steam­boat that pro­vides bi­monthly ser­vice from North Cape.</p>
				<p>So it is here, among these gal­lant peo­ple who have taken us in, that I’m re­view­ing my nar­ra­tive of these ad­ven­tures. It is ac­cu­rate. Not a fact has been omit­ted, not a de­tail has been ex­ag­ger­ated. It’s the faith­ful record of this in­con­ceiv­able ex­pe­di­tion into an el­e­ment now be­yond hu­man reach, but where progress will some­day make great in­roads.</p>
				<p>Will any­one be­lieve me? I don’t know. Ul­ti­mately it’s unim­por­tant. What I can now as­sert is that I’ve earned the right to speak of these seas, be­neath which in less than ten months, I’ve cleared 20,000 leagues in this un­der­wa­ter tour of the world that has shown me so many won­ders across the Pa­cific, the In­dian Ocean, the Red Sea, the Mediter­ranean, the At­lantic, the south­ern­most and north­ern­most seas!</p>
				<p>But what hap­pened to the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i>? Did it with­stand the Mael­strom’s clutches? Is Cap­tain Nemo alive? Is he still un­der the ocean pur­su­ing his fright­ful pro­gram of re­venge, or did he stop af­ter that lat­est mass ex­e­cu­tion? Will the waves some­day de­liver that man­u­script that con­tains his full life story? Will I fi­nally learn the man’s name? Will the na­tion­al­ity of the stricken war­ship tell us the na­tion­al­ity of Cap­tain Nemo?</p>
				<p>I hope so. I like­wise hope that his pow­er­ful sub­mersible has de­feated the sea in­side its most dread­ful whirlpool, that the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i> has sur­vived where so many ships have per­ished! If this is the case and Cap­tain Nemo still in­hab­its the ocean—his adopted coun­try—may the hate be ap­peased in that fierce heart! May the con­tem­pla­tion of so many won­ders ex­tin­guish the spirit of vengeance in him! May the ex­e­cu­tioner pass away, and the sci­en­tist con­tinue his peace­ful ex­plo­ration of the seas! If his des­tiny is strange, it’s also sub­lime. Haven’t I en­com­passed it my­self? Didn’t I lead ten months of this oth­er­worldly ex­is­tence? Thus to that ques­tion asked 6,000 years ago in the Book of Ec­cle­si­astes—“Who can fathom the sound­less depths?”—two men out of all hu­man­ity have now earned the right to re­ply. Cap­tain Nemo and I.</p>
			</section>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
