<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="en-US" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: http://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Chapter 2</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="part-2" epub:type="part">
			<section id="chapter-2-2" epub:type="chapter">
				<h3 epub:type="title">
					<span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span>
					<span class="epub-type-subtitle" epub:type="subtitle">A New Proposition from Captain Nemo</span>
				</h3>
				<p>On Jan­uary 28, in lat­i­tude 9° 4′ north, when the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i> re­turned at noon to the sur­face of the sea, it lay in sight of land some eight miles to the west. Right off, I ob­served a clus­ter of moun­tains about 2,000 feet high, whose shapes were very whim­si­cally sculpted. After our po­si­tion fix, I reen­tered the lounge, and when our bear­ings were re­ported on the chart, I saw that we were off the is­land of Cey­lon, that pearl dan­gling from the lower lobe of the In­dian penin­sula.</p>
				<p>I went look­ing in the li­brary for a book about this is­land, one of the most fer­tile in the world. Sure enough, I found a vol­ume en­ti­tled <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Cey­lon and the Sing­halese</i> by <span class="name">H. C.</span> Sirr, Esq. Reen­ter­ing the lounge, I first noted the bear­ings of Cey­lon, on which an­tiq­uity lav­ished so many dif­fer­ent names. It was lo­cated be­tween lat­i­tude 5° 55′ and 9° 49′ north, and be­tween lon­gi­tude 79° 42′ and 82° 4′ east of the merid­ian of Green­wich; its length is 275 miles; its max­i­mum width, 150 miles; its cir­cum­fer­ence, 900 miles; its sur­face area, 24,448 square miles, in other words, a lit­tle smaller than that of Ire­land.</p>
				<p>Just then Cap­tain Nemo and his chief of­fi­cer ap­peared.</p>
				<p>The cap­tain glanced at the chart. Then, turn­ing to me:</p>
				<p>“The is­land of Cey­lon,” he said, “is fa­mous for its pearl fish­eries. Would you be in­ter­ested, Pro­fes­sor Aron­nax, in vis­it­ing one of those fish­eries?”</p>
				<p>“Cer­tainly, cap­tain.”</p>
				<p>“Fine. It’s eas­ily done. Only, when we see the fish­eries, we’ll see no fish­er­men. The an­nual har­vest hasn’t yet be­gun. No mat­ter. I’ll give or­ders to make for the Gulf of Man­nar, and we’ll ar­rive there late tonight.”</p>
				<p>The cap­tain said a few words to his chief of­fi­cer who went out im­me­di­ately. Soon the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i> reen­tered its liq­uid el­e­ment, and the pres­sure gauge in­di­cated that it was stay­ing at a depth of thirty feet.</p>
				<p>With the chart un­der my eyes, I looked for the Gulf of Man­nar. I found it by the 9th par­al­lel off the north­west­ern shores of Cey­lon. It was formed by the long curve of lit­tle Man­nar Is­land. To reach it we had to go all the way up Cey­lon’s west coast.</p>
				<p>“Pro­fes­sor,” Cap­tain Nemo then told me, “there are pearl fish­eries in the Bay of Ben­gal, the seas of the East Indies, the seas of China and Ja­pan, plus those seas south of the United States, the Gulf of Panama and the Gulf of Cal­i­for­nia; but it’s off Cey­lon that such fish­ing reaps its rich­est re­wards. No doubt we’ll be ar­riv­ing a lit­tle early. Fish­er­men gather in the Gulf of Man­nar only dur­ing the month of March, and for thirty days some 300 boats con­cen­trate on the lu­cra­tive har­vest of these trea­sures from the sea. Each boat is manned by ten oars­men and ten fish­er­men. The lat­ter di­vide into two groups, dive in ro­ta­tion, and de­scend to a depth of twelve me­ters with the help of a heavy stone clutched be­tween their feet and at­tached by a rope to their boat.”</p>
				<p>“You mean,” I said, “that such prim­i­tive meth­ods are still all that they use?”</p>
				<p>“All,” Cap­tain Nemo an­swered me, “al­though these fish­eries be­long to the most in­dus­tri­al­ized peo­ple in the world, the English, to whom the Treaty of Amiens granted them in 1802.”</p>
				<p>“Yet it strikes me that div­ing suits like yours could per­form yeo­man ser­vice in such work.”</p>
				<p>“Yes, since those poor fish­er­men can’t stay long un­der­wa­ter. On his voy­age to Cey­lon, the English­man Per­ci­val made much of a Kaf­fir who stayed un­der five min­utes with­out com­ing up to the sur­face, but I find that hard to be­lieve. I know that some divers can last up to fifty-seven sec­onds, and highly skill­ful ones to eighty-seven; but such men are rare, and when the poor fel­lows climb back on board, the wa­ter com­ing out of their noses and ears is tinted with blood. I be­lieve the av­er­age time un­der­wa­ter that these fish­er­men can tol­er­ate is thirty sec­onds, dur­ing which they hastily stuff their lit­tle nets with all the pearl oys­ters they can tear loose. But these fish­er­men gen­er­ally don’t live to ad­vanced age: their vi­sion weak­ens, ul­cers break out on their eyes, sores form on their bod­ies, and some are even stricken with apoplexy on the ocean floor.”</p>
				<p>“Yes,” I said, “it’s a sad oc­cu­pa­tion, and one that ex­ists only to grat­ify the whims of fash­ion. But tell me, cap­tain, how many oys­ters can a boat fish up in a work­day?”</p>
				<p>“About 40,000 to 50,000. It’s even said that in 1814, when the English gov­ern­ment went fish­ing on its own be­half, its divers worked just twenty days and brought up 76,000,000 oys­ters.”</p>
				<p>“At least,” I asked, “the fish­er­men are well paid, aren’t they?”</p>
				<p>“Hardly, pro­fes­sor. In Panama they make just one dol­lar per week. In most places they earn only a penny for each oys­ter that has a pearl, and they bring up so many that have none!”</p>
				<p>“Only one penny to those poor peo­ple who make their em­ploy­ers rich! That’s atro­cious!”</p>
				<p>“On that note, pro­fes­sor,” Cap­tain Nemo told me, “you and your com­pan­ions will visit the Man­nar oys­ter­bank, and if by chance some ea­ger fish­er­man ar­rives early, well, we can watch him at work.”</p>
				<p>“That suits me, cap­tain.”</p>
				<p>“By the way, Pro­fes­sor Aron­nax, you aren’t afraid of sharks, are you?”</p>
				<p>“Sharks?” I ex­claimed.</p>
				<p>This struck me as a pretty need­less ques­tion, to say the least.</p>
				<p>“Well?” Cap­tain Nemo went on.</p>
				<p>“I ad­mit, cap­tain, I’m not yet on very fa­mil­iar terms with that genus of fish.”</p>
				<p>“We’re used to them, the rest of us,” Cap­tain Nemo an­swered. “And in time you will be too. Any­how, we’ll be armed, and on our way we might hunt a man-eater or two. It’s a fas­ci­nat­ing sport. So, pro­fes­sor, I’ll see you to­mor­row, bright and early.”</p>
				<p>This said in a care­free tone, Cap­tain Nemo left the lounge.</p>
				<p>If you’re in­vited to hunt bears in the Swiss moun­tains, you might say: “Oh good, I get to go bear hunt­ing to­mor­row!” If you’re in­vited to hunt li­ons on the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">At­las</i> plains or tigers in the jun­gles of In­dia, you might say: “Ha! Now’s my chance to hunt li­ons and tigers!” But if you’re in­vited to hunt sharks in their na­tive el­e­ment, you might want to think it over be­fore ac­cept­ing.</p>
				<p>As for me, I passed a hand over my brow, where beads of cold sweat were busy form­ing.</p>
				<p>“Let’s think this over,” I said to my­self, “and let’s take our time. Hunt­ing ot­ters in un­der­wa­ter forests, as we did in the forests of Cre­spo Is­land, is an ac­cept­able ac­tiv­ity. But to roam the bot­tom of the sea when you’re al­most cer­tain to meet man-eaters in the neigh­bor­hood, that’s an­other story! I know that in cer­tain coun­tries, par­tic­u­larly the An­daman Is­lands, Ne­groes don’t hes­i­tate to at­tack sharks, dag­ger in one hand and noose in the other; but I also know that many who face those fear­some an­i­mals don’t come back alive. Be­sides, I’m not a Ne­gro, and even if I were a Ne­gro, in this in­stance I don’t think a lit­tle hes­i­ta­tion on my part would be out of place.”</p>
				<p>And there I was, fan­ta­siz­ing about sharks, en­vi­sion­ing huge jaws armed with mul­ti­ple rows of teeth and ca­pa­ble of cut­ting a man in half. I could al­ready feel a def­i­nite pain around my pelvic gir­dle. And how I re­sented the off­hand man­ner in which the cap­tain had ex­tended his de­plorable in­vi­ta­tion! You would have thought it was an is­sue of go­ing into the woods on some harm­less fox hunt!</p>
				<p>“Thank heav­ens!” I said to my­self. “Con­seil will never want to come along, and that’ll be my ex­cuse for not go­ing with the cap­tain.”</p>
				<p>As for Ned Land, I ad­mit I felt less con­fi­dent of his wis­dom. Danger, how­ever great, held a peren­nial at­trac­tion for his ag­gres­sive na­ture.</p>
				<p>I went back to read­ing Sirr’s book, but I leafed through it me­chan­i­cally. Between the lines I kept see­ing fear­some, wide-open jaws.</p>
				<p>Just then Con­seil and the Cana­dian en­tered with a calm, even glee­ful air. Lit­tle did they know what was wait­ing for them.</p>
				<p>“Ye gods, sir!” Ned Land told me. “Your Cap­tain Nemo—the devil take him—has just made us a very pleas­ant propo­si­tion!”</p>
				<p>“Oh!” I said “You know about—”</p>
				<p>“With all due re­spect to mas­ter,” Con­seil replied, “the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i>’s com­man­der has in­vited us, to­gether with mas­ter, for a visit to­mor­row to Cey­lon’s mag­nif­i­cent pearl fish­eries. He did so in the most cor­dial terms and con­ducted him­self like a true gen­tle­man.”</p>
				<p>“He didn’t tell you any­thing else?”</p>
				<p>“Noth­ing, sir,” the Cana­dian replied. “He said you’d al­ready dis­cussed this lit­tle stroll.”</p>
				<p>“In­deed,” I said. “But didn’t he give you any de­tails on—”</p>
				<p>“Not a one, Mr. Nat­u­ral­ist. You will be go­ing with us, right?”</p>
				<p>“Me? Why yes, cer­tainly, of course! I can see that you like the idea, Mr. Land.”</p>
				<p>“Yes! It will be a re­ally un­usual ex­pe­ri­ence!”</p>
				<p>“And pos­si­bly dan­ger­ous!” I added in an in­sin­u­at­ing tone.</p>
				<p>“Danger­ous?” Ned Land replied. “A sim­ple trip to an oys­ter­bank?”</p>
				<p>As­suredly, Cap­tain Nemo hadn’t seen fit to plant the idea of sharks in the minds of my com­pan­ions. For my part, I stared at them with anx­ious eyes, as if they were al­ready miss­ing a limb or two. Should I alert them? Yes, surely, but I hardly knew how to go about it.</p>
				<p>“Would mas­ter,” Con­seil said to me, “give us some back­ground on pearl fish­ing?”</p>
				<p>“On the fish­ing it­self?” I asked. “Or on the oc­cu­pa­tional haz­ards that—”</p>
				<p>“On the fish­ing,” the Cana­dian replied. “Be­fore we tackle the ter­rain, it helps to be fa­mil­iar with it.”</p>
				<p>“All right, sit down, my friends, and I’ll teach you ev­ery­thing I my­self have just been taught by the English­man <span class="name">H. C.</span> Sirr!”</p>
				<p>Ned and Con­seil took seats on a couch, and right off the Cana­dian said to me:</p>
				<p>“Sir, just what is a pearl ex­actly?”</p>
				<p>“My gal­lant Ned,” I replied, “for po­ets a pearl is a tear from the sea; for Ori­en­tals it’s a drop of so­lid­i­fied dew; for the ladies it’s a jewel they can wear on their fin­gers, necks, and ears that’s ob­long in shape, glassy in lus­ter, and formed from mother-of-pearl; for chemists it’s a mix­ture of cal­cium phos­phate and cal­cium car­bon­ate with a lit­tle gelatin pro­tein; and fi­nally, for nat­u­ral­ists it’s a sim­ple fes­ter­ing se­cre­tion from the or­gan that pro­duces mother-of-pearl in cer­tain bi­valves.”</p>
				<p>“Branch <i epub:type="z3998:taxonomy">Mol­lusca</i>,” Con­seil said, “class <i epub:type="z3998:taxonomy">Acephala</i>, or­der <i epub:type="z3998:taxonomy">Tes­tacea</i>.”</p>
				<p>“Cor­rect, my schol­arly Con­seil. Now then, those <i epub:type="z3998:taxonomy">Tes­tacea</i> ca­pa­ble of pro­duc­ing pearls in­clude rain­bow abalone, turbo snails, gi­ant clams, and salt­wa­ter scal­lops—briefly, all those that se­crete mother-of-pearl, in other words, that blue, azure, vi­o­let, or white sub­stance lin­ing the in­sides of their valves.”</p>
				<p>“Are mus­sels in­cluded too?” the Cana­dian asked.</p>
				<p>“Yes! The mus­sels of cer­tain streams in Scot­land, Wales, Ire­land, Sax­ony, Bo­hemia, and France.”</p>
				<p>“Good!” the Cana­dian replied. “From now on we’ll pay closer at­ten­tion to ’em.”</p>
				<p>“But,” I went on, “for se­cret­ing pearls, the ideal mol­lusk is the pearl oys­ter <i epub:type="z3998:taxonomy">Me­lea­g­rina mar­gar­i­tifera</i>, that valu­able shell­fish. Pearls re­sult sim­ply from mother-of-pearl so­lid­i­fy­ing into a glob­u­lar shape. Either they stick to the oys­ter’s shell, or they be­come em­bed­ded in the crea­ture’s folds. On the valves a pearl sticks fast; on the flesh it lies loose. But its nu­cleus is al­ways some small, hard ob­ject, say a ster­ile egg or a grain of sand, around which the mother-of-pearl is de­posited in thin, con­cen­tric lay­ers over sev­eral years in suc­ces­sion.”</p>
				<p>“Can one find sev­eral pearls in the same oys­ter?” Con­seil asked.</p>
				<p>“Yes, my boy. There are some shell­fish that turn into real jewel cof­fers. They even men­tion one oys­ter, about which I re­main du­bi­ous, that sup­pos­edly con­tained at least 150 sharks.”</p>
				<p>“150 sharks!” Ned Land yelped.</p>
				<p>“Did I say sharks?” I ex­claimed hastily. “I meant 150 pearls. Sharks wouldn’t make sense.”</p>
				<p>“In­deed,” Con­seil said. “But will mas­ter now tell us how one goes about ex­tract­ing these pearls?”</p>
				<p>“One pro­ceeds in sev­eral ways, and of­ten when pearls stick to the valves, fish­er­men even pull them loose with pli­ers. But usu­ally the shell­fish are spread out on mats made from the es­parto grass that cov­ers the beaches. Thus they die in the open air, and by the end of ten days they’ve rot­ted suf­fi­ciently. Next they’re im­mersed in huge tanks of salt wa­ter, then they’re opened up and washed. At this point the sorters be­gin their twofold task. First they re­move the lay­ers of mother-of-pearl, which are known in the in­dus­try by the names le­git­i­mate sil­ver, bas­tard white, or bas­tard black, and these are shipped out in cases weigh­ing 125 to 150 kilo­grams. Then they re­move the oys­ter’s meaty tis­sue, boil it, and fi­nally strain it, in or­der to ex­tract even the small­est pearls.”</p>
				<p>“Do the prices of these pearls dif­fer de­pend­ing on their size?” Con­seil asked.</p>
				<p>“Not only on their size,” I replied, “but also ac­cord­ing to their shape, their wa­ter—in other words, their color—and their ori­ent—in other words, that dap­pled, shim­mer­ing glow that makes them so de­light­ful to the eye. The finest pearls are called vir­gin pearls, or paragons; they form in iso­la­tion within the mol­lusk’s tis­sue. They’re white, of­ten opaque but some­times of opales­cent trans­parency, and usu­ally spher­i­cal or pear-shaped. The spher­i­cal ones are made into bracelets; the pear-shaped ones into ear­rings, and since they’re the most valu­able, they’re priced in­di­vid­u­ally. The other pearls that stick to the oys­ter’s shell are more er­rat­i­cally shaped and are priced by weight. Fi­nally, classed in the low­est or­der, the small­est pearls are known by the name seed pearls; they’re priced by the mea­sur­ing cup and are used mainly in the cre­ation of em­broi­dery for church vest­ments.”</p>
				<p>“But it must be a long, hard job, sort­ing out these pearls by size,” the Cana­dian said.</p>
				<p>“No, my friend. That task is per­formed with eleven strain­ers, or sieves, that are pierced with dif­fer­ent num­bers of holes. Those pearls stay­ing in the strain­ers with twenty to eighty holes are in the first or­der. Those not slip­ping through the sieves pierced with 100 to 800 holes are in the sec­ond or­der. Fi­nally, those pearls for which one uses strain­ers pierced with 900 to 1,000 holes make up the seed pearls.”</p>
				<p>“How in­ge­nious,” Con­seil said, “to re­duce di­vid­ing and clas­si­fy­ing pearls to a me­chan­i­cal op­er­a­tion. And could mas­ter tell us the prof­its brought in by har­vest­ing these banks of pearl oys­ters?”</p>
				<p>“Ac­cord­ing to Sirr’s book,” I replied, “these Cey­lon fish­eries are farmed an­nu­ally for a to­tal profit of 3,000,000 man-eaters.”</p>
				<p>“Francs!” Con­seil re­buked.</p>
				<p>“Yes, francs! 3,000,000 francs!” I went on. “But I don’t think these fish­eries bring in the re­turns they once did. Sim­i­larly, the Cen­tral Amer­i­can fish­eries used to make an an­nual profit of 4,000,000 francs dur­ing the reign of King Charles <span epub:type="z3998:roman">V</span>, but now they bring in only two-thirds of that amount. All in all, it’s es­ti­mated that 9,000,000 francs is the cur­rent yearly re­turn for the whole pearl-har­vest­ing in­dus­try.”</p>
				<p>“But,” Con­seil asked, “haven’t cer­tain fa­mous pearls been quoted at ex­tremely high prices?”</p>
				<p>“Yes, my boy. They say Julius Cae­sar gave Servilia a pearl worth 120,000 francs in our cur­rency.”</p>
				<p>“I’ve even heard sto­ries,” the Cana­dian said, “about some lady in an­cient times who drank pearls in vine­gar.”</p>
				<p>“Cleopa­tra,” Con­seil shot back.</p>
				<p>“It must have tasted pretty bad,” Ned Land added.</p>
				<p>“Abom­inable, Ned my friend,” Con­seil replied. “But when a lit­tle glass of vine­gar is worth 1,500,000 francs, its taste is a small price to pay.”</p>
				<p>“I’m sorry I didn’t marry the gal,” the Cana­dian said, throw­ing up his hands with an air of dis­cour­age­ment.</p>
				<p>“Ned Land mar­ried to Cleopa­tra?” Con­seil ex­claimed.</p>
				<p>“But I was all set to tie the knot, Con­seil,” the Cana­dian replied in all se­ri­ous­ness, “and it wasn’t my fault the whole busi­ness fell through. I even bought a pearl neck­lace for my fi­ancée, Kate Ten­der, but she mar­ried some­body else in­stead. Well, that neck­lace cost me only $1.50, but you can ab­so­lutely trust me on this, pro­fes­sor, its pearls were so big, they wouldn’t have gone through that strainer with twenty holes.”</p>
				<p>“My gal­lant Ned,” I replied, laugh­ing, “those were ar­ti­fi­cial pearls, or­di­nary glass beads whose in­sides were coated with Essence of Ori­ent.”</p>
				<p>“Wow!” the Cana­dian replied. “That Essence of Ori­ent must sell for quite a large sum.”</p>
				<p>“As lit­tle as zero! It comes from the scales of a Euro­pean carp, it’s noth­ing more than a sil­ver sub­stance that col­lects in the wa­ter and is pre­served in am­mo­nia. It’s worth­less.”</p>
				<p>“Maybe that’s why Kate Ten­der mar­ried some­body else,” replied Mr. Land philo­soph­i­cally.</p>
				<p>“But,” I said, “get­ting back to pearls of great value, I don’t think any sov­er­eign ever pos­sessed one su­pe­rior to the pearl owned by Cap­tain Nemo.”</p>
				<p>“This one?” Con­seil said, point­ing to a mag­nif­i­cent jewel in its glass case.</p>
				<p>“Ex­actly. And I’m cer­tainly not far off when I es­ti­mate its value at 2,000,000 … uh …”</p>
				<p>“Francs!” Con­seil said quickly.</p>
				<p>“Yes,” I said, “2,000,000 francs, and no doubt all it cost our cap­tain was the ef­fort to pick it up.”</p>
				<p>“Ha!” Ned Land ex­claimed. “Dur­ing our stroll to­mor­row, who says we won’t run into one just like it?”</p>
				<p>“Bah!” Con­seil put in.</p>
				<p>“And why not?”</p>
				<p>“What good would a pearl worth mil­lions do us here on the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i>?”</p>
				<p>“Here, no,” Ned Land said. “But else­where. …”</p>
				<p>“Oh! Else­where!” Con­seil put in, shak­ing his head.</p>
				<p>“In fact,” I said, “Mr. Land is right. And if we ever brought back to Europe or Amer­ica a pearl worth mil­lions, it would make the story of our ad­ven­tures more au­then­tic—and much more re­ward­ing.”</p>
				<p>“That’s how I see it,” the Cana­dian said.</p>
				<p>“But,” said Con­seil, who per­pet­u­ally re­turned to the di­dac­tic side of things, “is this pearl fish­ing ever dan­ger­ous?”</p>
				<p>“No,” I replied quickly, “es­pe­cially if one takes cer­tain pre­cau­tions.”</p>
				<p>“What risks would you run in a job like that?” Ned Land said. “Swal­low­ing a few gulps of salt wa­ter?”</p>
				<p>“What­ever you say, Ned.” Then, try­ing to im­i­tate Cap­tain Nemo’s care­free tone, I asked, “By the way, gal­lant Ned, are you afraid of sharks?”</p>
				<p>“Me?” the Cana­dian replied. “I’m a pro­fes­sional har­pooner! It’s my job to make a mock­ery of them!”</p>
				<p>“It isn’t an is­sue,” I said, “of fish­ing for them with a swivel hook, hoist­ing them onto the deck of a ship, chop­ping off the tail with a sweep of the ax, open­ing the belly, rip­ping out the heart, and toss­ing it into the sea.”</p>
				<p>“So it’s an is­sue of … ?”</p>
				<p>“Yes, pre­cisely.”</p>
				<p>“In the wa­ter?”</p>
				<p>“In the wa­ter.”</p>
				<p>“Ye gods, just give me a good har­poon! You see, sir, these sharks are badly de­signed. They have to roll their bel­lies over to snap you up, and in the mean­time …”</p>
				<p>Ned Land had a way of pro­nounc­ing the word “snap” that sent chills down the spine.</p>
				<p>“Well, how about you, Con­seil? What are your feel­ings about these man-eaters?”</p>
				<p>“Me?” Con­seil said. “I’m afraid I must be frank with mas­ter.”</p>
				<p>Good for you, I thought.</p>
				<p>“If mas­ter faces these sharks,” Con­seil said, “I think his loyal manser­vant should face them with him!”</p>
			</section>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
