<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="en-US" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: http://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Chapter 14</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="part-1" epub:type="part">
			<section id="chapter-1-14" epub:type="chapter">
				<h3 epub:type="title">
					<span class="first-child" epub:type="z3998:roman">XIV</span>
					<span class="epub-type-subtitle" epub:type="subtitle">The Black Current</span>
				</h3>
				<p>The part of the planet earth that the seas oc­cupy has been as­sessed at 3,832,558 square myr­i­am­e­ters, hence more than 38,000,000,000 hectares. This liq­uid mass to­tals 2,250,000,000 cu­bic miles and could form a sphere with a di­am­e­ter of sixty leagues, whose weight would be three quin­til­lion met­ric tons. To ap­pre­ci­ate such a num­ber, we should re­mem­ber that a quin­til­lion is to a bil­lion what a bil­lion is to one, in other words, there are as many bil­lions in a quin­til­lion as ones in a bil­lion! Now then, this liq­uid mass nearly equals the to­tal amount of wa­ter that has poured through all the earth’s rivers for the past 40,000 years!</p>
				<p>Dur­ing pre­his­toric times, an era of fire was fol­lowed by an era of wa­ter. At first there was ocean ev­ery­where. Then, dur­ing the Sil­urian pe­riod, the tops of moun­tains grad­u­ally ap­peared above the waves, is­lands emerged, dis­ap­peared be­neath tem­po­rary floods, rose again, were fused to form con­ti­nents, and fi­nally the earth’s ge­og­ra­phy set­tled into what we have to­day. Solid mat­ter had wrested from liq­uid mat­ter some 37,657,000 square miles, hence 12,916,000,000 hectares.</p>
				<p>The out­lines of the con­ti­nents al­low the seas to be di­vided into five ma­jor parts: the frozen Arc­tic and Antarc­tic oceans, the In­dian Ocean, the At­lantic Ocean, and the Pa­cific Ocean.</p>
				<p>The Pa­cific Ocean ex­tends north to south be­tween the two po­lar cir­cles and east to west be­tween Amer­ica and Asia over an ex­panse of 145° of lon­gi­tude. It’s the most tran­quil of the seas; its cur­rents are wide and slow-mov­ing, its tides mod­er­ate, its rain­fall abun­dant. And this was the ocean that I was first des­tined to cross un­der these strangest of aus­pices.</p>
				<p>“If you don’t mind, pro­fes­sor,” Cap­tain Nemo told me, “we’ll de­ter­mine our ex­act po­si­tion and fix the start­ing point of our voy­age. It’s fif­teen min­utes be­fore noon. I’m go­ing to rise to the sur­face of the wa­ter.”</p>
				<p>The cap­tain pressed an elec­tric bell three times. The pumps be­gan to ex­pel wa­ter from the bal­last tanks; on the pres­sure gauge, a nee­dle marked the de­creas­ing pres­sures that in­di­cated the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i>’s up­ward progress; then the nee­dle stopped.</p>
				<p>“Here we are,” the cap­tain said.</p>
				<p>I made my way to the cen­tral com­pan­ion­way, which led to the plat­form. I climbed its metal steps, passed through the open hatches, and ar­rived top­side on the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i>.</p>
				<p>The plat­form emerged only eighty cen­time­ters above the waves. The <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i>’s bow and stern boasted that spin­dle-shaped out­line that had caused the ship to be com­pared ap­pro­pri­ately to a long cigar. I noted the slight over­lap of its sheet-iron plates, which re­sem­bled the scales cov­er­ing the bod­ies of our big land rep­tiles. So I had a per­fectly nat­u­ral ex­pla­na­tion for why, de­spite the best spy­glasses, this boat had al­ways been mis­taken for a ma­rine an­i­mal.</p>
				<p>Near the mid­dle of the plat­form, the skiff was half set in the ship’s hull, mak­ing a slight bulge. Fore and aft stood two cupo­las of mod­er­ate height, their sides slant­ing and partly in­set with heavy bi­con­vex glass, one re­served for the helms­man steer­ing the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i>, the other for the bril­liance of the pow­er­ful elec­tric bea­con light­ing his way.</p>
				<p>The sea was mag­nif­i­cent, the skies clear. This long aquatic ve­hi­cle could barely feel the broad un­du­la­tions of the ocean. A mild breeze out of the east rip­pled the sur­face of the wa­ter. Free of all mist, the hori­zon was ideal for tak­ing sights.</p>
				<p>There was noth­ing to be seen. Not a reef, not an islet. No more <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Abra­ham Lin­coln</i>. A de­serted im­mense­ness.</p>
				<p>Rais­ing his sex­tant, Cap­tain Nemo took the al­ti­tude of the sun, which would give him his lat­i­tude. He waited for a few min­utes un­til the orb touched the rim of the hori­zon. While he was tak­ing his sights, he didn’t move a mus­cle, and the in­stru­ment couldn’t have been stead­ier in hands made out of mar­ble.</p>
				<p>“Noon,” he said. “Pro­fes­sor, when­ever you’re ready. …”</p>
				<p>I took one last look at the sea, a lit­tle yel­low­ish near the land­ing places of Ja­pan, and I went be­low again to the main lounge.</p>
				<p>There the cap­tain fixed his po­si­tion and used a chronome­ter to cal­cu­late his lon­gi­tude, which he dou­ble-checked against his pre­vi­ous ob­ser­va­tions of hour an­gles. Then he told me:</p>
				<p>“Pro­fes­sor Aron­nax, we’re in lon­gi­tude 137° 15′ west—”</p>
				<p>“West of which merid­ian?” I asked quickly, hop­ing the cap­tain’s re­ply might give me a clue to his na­tion­al­ity.</p>
				<p>“Sir,” he an­swered me, “I have chronome­ters var­i­ously set to the merid­i­ans of Paris, Green­wich, and Wash­ing­ton, DC. But in your honor, I’ll use the one for Paris.”</p>
				<p>This re­ply told me noth­ing. I bowed, and the com­man­der went on:</p>
				<p>“We’re in lon­gi­tude 137° 15′ west of the merid­ian of Paris, and lat­i­tude 30° 7′ north, in other words, about 300 miles from the shores of Ja­pan. At noon on this day of Novem­ber 8, we hereby be­gin our voy­age of ex­plo­ration un­der the wa­ters.”</p>
				<p>“May God be with us!” I replied.</p>
				<p>“And now, pro­fes­sor,” the cap­tain added, “I’ll leave you to your in­tel­lec­tual pur­suits. I’ve set our course east-north­east at a depth of fifty me­ters. Here are some large-scale charts on which you’ll be able to fol­low that course. The lounge is at your dis­posal, and with your per­mis­sion, I’ll take my leave.”</p>
				<p>Cap­tain Nemo bowed. I was left to my­self, lost in my thoughts. They all cen­tered on the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i>’s com­man­der. Would I ever learn the na­tion­al­ity of this ec­cen­tric man who had boasted of hav­ing none? His sworn hate for hu­man­ity, a hate that per­haps was bent on some dread­ful re­venge—what had pro­voked it? Was he one of those un­ap­pre­ci­ated schol­ars, one of those ge­niuses “em­bit­tered by the world,” as Con­seil ex­pressed it, a lat­ter-day Galileo, or maybe one of those men of sci­ence, like Amer­ica’s Com­man­der Maury, whose ca­reers were ru­ined by po­lit­i­cal rev­o­lu­tions? I couldn’t say yet. As for me, whom fate had just brought aboard his ves­sel, whose life he had held in the bal­ance: he had re­ceived me coolly but hos­pitably. Only, he never took the hand I ex­tended to him. He never ex­tended his own.</p>
				<p>For an en­tire hour I was deep in these mus­ings, try­ing to probe this mys­tery that fas­ci­nated me so. Then my eyes fo­cused on a huge world map dis­played on the ta­ble, and I put my fin­ger on the very spot where our just-de­ter­mined lon­gi­tude and lat­i­tude in­ter­sected.</p>
				<p>Like the con­ti­nents, the sea has its rivers. Th­ese are ex­clu­sive cur­rents that can be iden­ti­fied by their tem­per­a­ture and color, the most re­mark­able be­ing the one called the Gulf Stream. Science has de­fined the global paths of five chief cur­rents: one in the north At­lantic, a sec­ond in the south At­lantic, a third in the north Pa­cific, a fourth in the south Pa­cific, and a fifth in the south­ern In­dian Ocean. Also it’s likely that a sixth cur­rent used to ex­ist in the north­ern In­dian Ocean, when the Caspian and Aral Seas joined up with cer­tain large Asian lakes to form a sin­gle uni­form ex­panse of wa­ter.</p>
				<p>Now then, at the spot in­di­cated on the world map, one of these seago­ing rivers was rolling by, the Kuroshio of the Ja­panese, the Black Cur­rent: heated by per­pen­dic­u­lar rays from the trop­i­cal sun, it leaves the Bay of Ben­gal, crosses the Strait of Malacca, goes up the shores of Asia, and curves into the north Pa­cific as far as the Aleu­tian Is­lands, car­ry­ing along trunks of cam­phor trees and other lo­cal items, the pure in­digo of its warm wa­ters sharply con­trast­ing with the ocean’s waves. It was this cur­rent the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i> was about to cross. I watched it on the map with my eyes, I saw it lose it­self in the im­mense­ness of the Pa­cific, and I felt my­self swept along with it, when Ned Land and Con­seil ap­peared in the lounge door­way.</p>
				<p>My two gal­lant com­pan­ions stood pet­ri­fied at the sight of the won­ders on dis­play.</p>
				<p>“Where are we?” the Cana­dian ex­claimed. “In the Que­bec Mu­seum?”</p>
				<p>“Beg­ging mas­ter’s par­don,” Con­seil an­swered, “but this seems more like the Som­mer­ard ar­ti­facts ex­hi­bi­tion!”</p>
				<p>“My friends,” I replied, sig­nal­ing them to en­ter, “you’re in nei­ther Canada nor France, but se­curely aboard the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i>, fifty me­ters be­low sea level.”</p>
				<p>“If mas­ter says so, then so be it,” Con­seil an­swered. “But in all hon­esty, this lounge is enough to as­ton­ish even some­one Flem­ish like my­self.”</p>
				<p>“In­dulge your as­ton­ish­ment, my friend, and have a look, be­cause there’s plenty of work here for a clas­si­fier of your tal­ents.”</p>
				<p>Con­seil needed no en­cour­ag­ing. Bend­ing over the glass cases, the gal­lant lad was al­ready mut­ter­ing choice words from the nat­u­ral­ist’s vo­cab­u­lary: class <i epub:type="z3998:taxonomy">Gas­tropoda</i>, fam­ily <i epub:type="z3998:taxonomy">Buc­ci­noidea</i>, genus <i epub:type="z3998:taxonomy">cowry</i>, species <i epub:type="z3998:taxonomy">Cypraea mada­gas­carien­sis</i>, etc.</p>
				<p>Mean­while Ned Land, less ded­i­cated to con­chol­ogy, ques­tioned me about my in­ter­view with Cap­tain Nemo. Had I dis­cov­ered who he was, where he came from, where he was head­ing, how deep he was tak­ing us? In short, a thou­sand ques­tions I had no time to an­swer.</p>
				<p>I told him ev­ery­thing I knew—or, rather, ev­ery­thing I didn’t know—and I asked him what he had seen or heard on his part.</p>
				<p>“Haven’t seen or heard a thing!” the Cana­dian replied. “I haven’t even spot­ted the crew of this boat. By any chance, could they be elec­tric too?”</p>
				<p>“Elec­tric?”</p>
				<p>“Oh ye gods, I’m half tempted to be­lieve it! But back to you, Pro­fes­sor Aron­nax,” Ned Land said, still hang­ing on to his ideas. “Can’t you tell me how many men are on board? Ten, twenty, fifty, a hun­dred?”</p>
				<p>“I’m un­able to an­swer you, Mr. Land. And trust me on this: for the time be­ing, get rid of these no­tions of tak­ing over the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i> or es­cap­ing from it. This boat is a mas­ter­piece of mod­ern tech­nol­ogy, and I’d be sorry to have missed it! Many peo­ple would wel­come the cir­cum­stances that have been handed us, just to walk in the midst of these won­ders. So keep calm, and let’s see what’s hap­pen­ing around us.”</p>
				<p>“See!” the har­pooner ex­claimed. “There’s noth­ing to see, noth­ing we’ll ever see from this sheet-iron prison! We’re sim­ply run­ning around blind­folded—”</p>
				<p>Ned Land was just pro­nounc­ing these last words when we were sud­denly plunged into dark­ness, ut­ter dark­ness. The ceil­ing lights went out so quickly, my eyes lit­er­ally ached, just as if we had ex­pe­ri­enced the op­po­site sen­sa­tion of go­ing from the deep­est gloom to the bright­est sun­light.</p>
				<p>We stood stock-still, not know­ing what sur­prise was wait­ing for us, whether pleas­ant or un­pleas­ant. But a slid­ing sound be­came au­di­ble. You could tell that some pan­els were shift­ing over the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i>’s sides.</p>
				<p>“It’s the be­gin­ning of the end!” Ned Land said.</p>
				<p>“… or­der <i epub:type="z3998:taxonomy">Hy­drome­dusa</i>,” Con­seil mut­tered.</p>
				<p>Sud­denly, through two ob­long open­ings, day­light ap­peared on both sides of the lounge. The liq­uid masses came into view, brightly lit by the ship’s elec­tric out­pour­ings. We were sep­a­rated from the sea by two panes of glass. Ini­tially I shud­dered at the thought that these frag­ile par­ti­tions could break; but strong cop­per bands se­cured them, giv­ing them nearly in­fi­nite re­sis­tance.</p>
				<p>The sea was clearly vis­i­ble for a one-mile ra­dius around the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i>. What a sight! What pen could de­scribe it? Who could por­tray the ef­fects of this light through these translu­cent sheets of wa­ter, the sub­tlety of its pro­gres­sive shad­ings into the ocean’s up­per and lower strata?</p>
				<p>The trans­parency of salt wa­ter has long been rec­og­nized. Its clar­ity is be­lieved to ex­ceed that of spring wa­ter. The min­eral and or­ganic sub­stances it holds in sus­pen­sion ac­tu­ally in­crease its translu­cency. In cer­tain parts of the Caribbean Sea, you can see the sandy bot­tom with star­tling dis­tinct­ness as deep as 145 me­ters down, and the pen­e­trat­ing power of the sun’s rays seems to give out only at a depth of 300 me­ters. But in this fluid set­ting trav­eled by the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i>, our elec­tric glow was be­ing gen­er­ated in the very heart of the waves. It was no longer il­lu­mi­nated wa­ter, it was liq­uid light.</p>
				<p>If we ac­cept the hy­pothe­ses of the mi­cro­bi­ol­o­gist Ehren­berg—who be­lieves that these un­der­wa­ter depths are lit up by phos­pho­res­cent or­gan­isms—na­ture has cer­tainly saved one of her most prodi­gious sights for res­i­dents of the sea, and I could judge for my­self from the thou­sand­fold play of the light. On both sides I had win­dows open­ing over these un­ex­plored depths. The dark­ness in the lounge en­hanced the bright­ness out­side, and we stared as if this clear glass were the win­dow of an im­mense aquar­ium.</p>
				<p>The <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i> seemed to be stand­ing still. This was due to the lack of land­marks. But streaks of wa­ter, parted by the ship’s spur, some­times threaded be­fore our eyes with ex­tra­or­di­nary speed.</p>
				<p>In won­der­ment, we leaned on our el­bows be­fore these show win­dows, and our stunned si­lence re­mained un­bro­ken un­til Con­seil said:</p>
				<p>“You wanted to see some­thing, Ned my friend; well, now you have some­thing to see!”</p>
				<p>“How un­usual!” the Cana­dian put in, set­ting aside his tantrums and get­away schemes while sub­mit­ting to this ir­re­sistible al­lure. “A man would go an even greater dis­tance just to stare at such a sight!”</p>
				<p>“Ah!” I ex­claimed. “I see our cap­tain’s way of life! He’s found him­self a sep­a­rate world that saves its most as­ton­ish­ing won­ders just for him!”</p>
				<p>“But where are the fish?” the Cana­dian ven­tured to ob­serve. “I don’t see any fish!”</p>
				<p>“Why would you care, Ned my friend?” Con­seil replied. “Since you have no knowl­edge of them.”</p>
				<p>“Me? A fish­er­man!” Ned Land ex­claimed.</p>
				<p>And on this sub­ject a dis­pute arose be­tween the two friends, since both were knowl­edge­able about fish, but from to­tally dif­fer­ent stand­points.</p>
				<p>Every­one knows that fish make up the fourth and last class in the ver­te­brate branch. They have been quite aptly de­fined as: “cold­blooded ver­te­brates with a dou­ble cir­cu­la­tory sys­tem, breath­ing through gills, and de­signed to live in wa­ter.” They con­sist of two dis­tinct se­ries: the se­ries of bony fish, in other words, those whose spines have ver­te­brae made of bone; and car­ti­lagi­nous fish, in other words, those whose spines have ver­te­brae made of car­ti­lage.</p>
				<p>Pos­si­bly the Cana­dian was fa­mil­iar with this dis­tinc­tion, but Con­seil knew far more about it; and since he and Ned were now fast friends, he just had to show off. So he told the har­pooner:</p>
				<p>“Ned my friend, you’re a slayer of fish, a highly skilled fish­er­man. You’ve caught a large num­ber of these fas­ci­nat­ing an­i­mals. But I’ll bet you don’t know how they’re clas­si­fied.”</p>
				<p>“Sure I do,” the har­pooner replied in all se­ri­ous­ness. “They’re clas­si­fied into fish we eat and fish we don’t eat!”</p>
				<p>“Spo­ken like a true glut­ton,” Con­seil replied. “But tell me, are you fa­mil­iar with the dif­fer­ences be­tween bony fish and car­ti­lagi­nous fish?”</p>
				<p>“Just maybe, Con­seil.”</p>
				<p>“And how about the sub­di­vi­sions of these two large classes?”</p>
				<p>“I haven’t the fog­gi­est no­tion,” the Cana­dian replied.</p>
				<p>“All right, lis­ten and learn, Ned my friend! Bony fish are sub­di­vided into six or­ders. Primo, the <i epub:type="z3998:taxonomy">acan­thoptery­gians</i>, whose up­per jaw is fully formed and free-mov­ing, and whose gills take the shape of a comb. This or­der con­sists of fif­teen fam­i­lies, in other words, three-quar­ters of all known fish. Ex­am­ple: the com­mon perch.”</p>
				<p>“Pretty fair eat­ing,” Ned Land replied.</p>
				<p>“Se­cundo,” Con­seil went on, “the <i epub:type="z3998:taxonomy">ab­dom­i­nals</i>, whose pelvic fins hang un­der the ab­domen to the rear of the pec­torals but aren’t at­tached to the shoul­der bone, an or­der that’s di­vided into five fam­i­lies and makes up the great ma­jor­ity of fresh­wa­ter fish. Ex­am­ples: carp, pike.”</p>
				<p>“Ugh!” the Cana­dian put in with dis­tinct scorn. “You can keep the fresh­wa­ter fish!”</p>
				<p>“Ter­tio,” Con­seil said, “the <i epub:type="z3998:taxonomy">sub­brachi­ans</i>, whose pelvic fins are at­tached un­der the pec­torals and hang di­rectly from the shoul­der bone. This or­der con­tains four fam­i­lies. Ex­am­ples: flat­fish such as sole, tur­bot, dab, plaice, brill, etc.”</p>
				<p>“Ex­cel­lent, re­ally ex­cel­lent!” the har­pooner ex­claimed, in­ter­ested in fish only from an ed­i­ble view­point.</p>
				<p>“Quarto,” Con­seil went on, un­abashed, “the <i epub:type="z3998:taxonomy">apods</i>, with long bod­ies that lack pelvic fins and are cov­ered by a heavy, of­ten gluti­nous skin, an or­der con­sist­ing of only one fam­ily. Ex­am­ples: com­mon eels and elec­tric eels.”</p>
				<p>“So-so, just so-so!” Ned Land replied.</p>
				<p>“Quinto,” Con­seil said, “the <i epub:type="z3998:taxonomy">lo­pho­branchi­ans</i>, which have fully formed, free-mov­ing jaws but whose gills con­sist of lit­tle tufts ar­ranged in pairs along their gill arches. This or­der in­cludes only one fam­ily. Ex­am­ples: sea­horses and drag­on­fish.”</p>
				<p>“Bad, very bad!” the har­pooner replied.</p>
				<p>“Sexto and last,” Con­seil said, “the <i epub:type="z3998:taxonomy">plec­tog­naths</i>, whose max­il­lary bone is firmly at­tached to the side of the in­ter­max­il­lary that forms the jaw, and whose palate arch is locked to the skull by su­tures that ren­der the jaw im­mov­able, an or­der lack­ing true pelvic fins and which con­sists of two fam­i­lies. Ex­am­ples: puffers and moon­fish.”</p>
				<p>“They’re an in­sult to a fry­ing pan!” the Cana­dian ex­claimed.</p>
				<p>“Are you grasp­ing all this, Ned my friend?” asked the schol­arly Con­seil.</p>
				<p>“Not a lick of it, Con­seil my friend,” the har­pooner replied. “But keep go­ing, be­cause you fill me with fas­ci­na­tion.”</p>
				<p>“As for car­ti­lagi­nous fish,” Con­seil went on un­flap­pably, “they con­sist of only three or­ders.”</p>
				<p>“Good news,” Ned put in.</p>
				<p>“Primo, the <i epub:type="z3998:taxonomy">cy­clostomes</i>, whose jaws are fused into a flex­i­ble ring and whose gill open­ings are sim­ply a large num­ber of holes, an or­der con­sist­ing of only one fam­ily. Ex­am­ple: the lam­prey.”</p>
				<p>“An ac­quired taste,” Ned Land replied.</p>
				<p>“Se­cundo, the <i epub:type="z3998:taxonomy">sela­cians</i>, with gills re­sem­bling those of the cy­clostomes but whose lower jaw is free-mov­ing. This or­der, which is the most im­por­tant in the class, con­sists of two fam­i­lies. Ex­am­ples: the ray and the shark.”</p>
				<p>“What!” Ned Land ex­claimed. “Rays and man-eaters in the same or­der? Well, Con­seil my friend, on be­half of the rays, I wouldn’t ad­vise you to put them in the same fish tank!”</p>
				<p>“Ter­tio,” Con­seil replied, “The <i epub:type="z3998:taxonomy">stu­ri­o­ni­ans</i>, whose gill open­ing is the usual sin­gle slit adorned with a gill cover, an or­der con­sist­ing of four gen­era. Ex­am­ple: the stur­geon.”</p>
				<p>“Ah, Con­seil my friend, you saved the best for last, in my opin­ion any­how! And that’s all of ’em?”</p>
				<p>“Yes, my gal­lant Ned,” Con­seil replied. “And note well, even when one has grasped all this, one still knows next to noth­ing, be­cause these fam­i­lies are sub­di­vided into gen­era, sub­gen­era, species, va­ri­eties—”</p>
				<p>“All right, Con­seil my friend,” the har­pooner said, lean­ing to­ward the glass panel, “here come a cou­ple of your va­ri­eties now!”</p>
				<p>“Yes! Fish!” Con­seil ex­claimed. “One would think he was in front of an aquar­ium!”</p>
				<p>“No,” I replied, “be­cause an aquar­ium is noth­ing more than a cage, and these fish are as free as birds in the air!”</p>
				<p>“Well, Con­seil my friend, iden­tify them! Start nam­ing them!” Ned Land ex­claimed.</p>
				<p>“Me?” Con­seil replied. “I’m un­able to! That’s my em­ployer’s baili­wick!”</p>
				<p>And in truth, al­though the fine lad was a clas­si­fy­ing ma­niac, he was no nat­u­ral­ist, and I doubt that he could tell a bonito from a tuna. In short, he was the ex­act op­po­site of the Cana­dian, who knew noth­ing about clas­si­fi­ca­tion but could in­stantly put a name to any fish.</p>
				<p>“A trig­ger­fish,” I said.</p>
				<p>“It’s a Chi­nese trig­ger­fish,” Ned Land replied.</p>
				<p>“Genus <i epub:type="z3998:taxonomy">Bal­istes</i>, fam­ily <i epub:type="z3998:taxonomy">Sclero­derma</i>, or­der <i epub:type="z3998:taxonomy">Plec­tog­natha</i>,” Con­seil mut­tered.</p>
				<p>As­suredly, Ned and Con­seil in com­bi­na­tion added up to one out­stand­ing nat­u­ral­ist.</p>
				<p>The Cana­dian was not mis­taken. Ca­vort­ing around the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i> was a school of trig­ger­fish with flat bod­ies, grainy skins, armed with stings on their dor­sal fins, and with four prickly rows of quills quiv­er­ing on both sides of their tails. Noth­ing could have been more won­der­ful than the skin cov­er­ing them: white un­der­neath, gray above, with spots of gold sparkling in the dark ed­dies of the waves. Around them, rays were un­du­lat­ing like sheets flap­ping in the wind, and among these I spot­ted, much to my glee, a Chi­nese ray, yel­low­ish on its top­side, a dainty pink on its belly, and armed with three stings be­hind its eyes; a rare species whose very ex­is­tence was still doubted in Lacépède’s day, since that pi­o­neer­ing clas­si­fier of fish had seen one only in a port­fo­lio of Ja­panese draw­ings.</p>
				<p>For two hours a whole aquatic army es­corted the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i>. In the midst of their leap­ing and ca­vort­ing, while they com­peted with each other in beauty, ra­di­ance, and speed, I could dis­tin­guish some green wrasse, be­whiskered mul­let marked with pairs of black lines, white go­b­ies from the genus <i epub:type="z3998:taxonomy">Eleotris</i> with curved cau­dal fins and vi­o­let spots on the back, won­der­ful Ja­panese mack­erel from the genus <i epub:type="z3998:taxonomy">Scomber</i> with blue bod­ies and sil­ver heads, glit­ter­ing azure gold­fish whose name by it­self gives their full de­scrip­tion, sev­eral va­ri­eties of porgy or gilt­head (some banded gilt­head with fins var­i­ously blue and yel­low, some with hor­i­zon­tal heraldic bars and en­hanced by a black strip around their cau­dal area, some with color zones and el­e­gantly corseted in their six waist­bands), trum­pet­fish with flute­like beaks that looked like gen­uine sea­far­ing wood­cocks and were some­times a me­ter long, Ja­panese sala­man­ders, ser­pen­tine moray eels from the genus <i epub:type="z3998:taxonomy">Echidna</i> that were six feet long with sharp lit­tle eyes and a huge mouth bristling with teeth; etc.</p>
				<p>Our won­der­ment stayed at an all-time fever pitch. Our ex­cla­ma­tions were end­less. Ned iden­ti­fied the fish, Con­seil clas­si­fied them, and as for me, I was in ec­stasy over the verve of their move­ments and the beauty of their forms. Never be­fore had I been given the chance to glimpse these an­i­mals alive and at large in their na­tive el­e­ment.</p>
				<p>Given such a com­plete col­lec­tion from the seas of Ja­pan and China, I won’t men­tion ev­ery va­ri­ety that passed be­fore our daz­zled eyes. More nu­mer­ous than birds in the air, these fish raced right up to us, no doubt at­tracted by the bril­liant glow of our elec­tric bea­con.</p>
				<p>Sud­denly day­light ap­peared in the lounge. The sheet-iron pan­els slid shut. The mag­i­cal vi­sion dis­ap­peared. But for a good while I kept dream­ing away, un­til the mo­ment my eyes fo­cused on the in­stru­ments hang­ing on the wall. The com­pass still showed our head­ing as east-north­east, the pres­sure gauge in­di­cated a pres­sure of five at­mos­pheres (cor­re­spond­ing to a depth of fifty me­ters), and the elec­tric log gave our speed as fif­teen miles per hour.</p>
				<p>I waited for Cap­tain Nemo. But he didn’t ap­pear. The clock marked the hour of five.</p>
				<p>Ned Land and Con­seil re­turned to their cabin. As for me, I re­paired to my state­room. There I found din­ner ready for me. It con­sisted of tur­tle soup made from the dain­ti­est hawks­bill, a red mul­let with white, slightly flaky flesh, whose liver, when sep­a­rately pre­pared, makes de­li­cious eat­ing, plus loin of im­pe­rial an­gelfish, whose fla­vor struck me as even bet­ter than salmon.</p>
				<p>I spent the evening in read­ing, writ­ing, and think­ing. Then drowsi­ness over­took me, I stretched out on my eel­grass mat­tress, and I fell into a deep slum­ber, while the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i> glided through the swiftly flow­ing Black Cur­rent.</p>
			</section>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
