<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="en-US" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: http://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Chapter 24</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="part-1" epub:type="part">
			<section id="chapter-1-24" epub:type="chapter">
				<h3 epub:type="title">
					<span class="first-child" epub:type="z3998:roman">XXIV</span>
					<span class="epub-type-subtitle" epub:type="subtitle">The Coral Realm</span>
				</h3>
				<p>The next day I woke up with my head un­usu­ally clear. Much to my sur­prise, I was in my state­room. No doubt my com­pan­ions had been put back in their cabin with­out notic­ing it any more than I had. Like me, they would have no idea what took place dur­ing the night, and to un­ravel this mys­tery I could count only on some fu­ture hap­pen­stance.</p>
				<p>I then con­sid­ered leav­ing my state­room. Was I free or still a pris­oner? Per­fectly free. I opened my door, headed down the gang­ways, and climbed the cen­tral com­pan­ion­way. Hatches that had been closed the day be­fore were now open. I ar­rived on the plat­form.</p>
				<p>Ned Land and Con­seil were there wait­ing for me. I ques­tioned them. They knew noth­ing. Lost in a heavy sleep of which they had no mem­ory, they were quite star­tled to be back in their cabin.</p>
				<p>As for the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i>, it seemed as tran­quil and mys­te­ri­ous as ever. It was cruis­ing on the sur­face of the waves at a mod­er­ate speed. Noth­ing seemed to have changed on board.</p>
				<p>Ned Land ob­served the sea with his pen­e­trat­ing eyes. It was de­serted. The Cana­dian sighted noth­ing new on the hori­zon, nei­ther sail nor shore. A breeze was blow­ing nois­ily from the west, and di­sheveled by the wind, long bil­lows made the sub­mersible roll very no­tice­ably.</p>
				<p>After re­new­ing its air, the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i> stayed at an av­er­age depth of fif­teen me­ters, en­abling it to re­turn quickly to the sur­face of the waves. And, con­trary to cus­tom, it ex­e­cuted such a ma­neu­ver sev­eral times dur­ing that day of Jan­uary 19. The chief of­fi­cer would then climb onto the plat­form, and his usual phrase would ring through the ship’s in­te­rior.</p>
				<p>As for Cap­tain Nemo, he didn’t ap­pear. Of the other men on board, I saw only my emo­tion­less stew­ard, who served me with his usual mute ef­fi­ciency.</p>
				<p>Near two o’clock I was busy or­ga­niz­ing my notes in the lounge, when the cap­tain opened the door and ap­peared. I bowed to him. He gave me an al­most im­per­cep­ti­ble bow in re­turn, with­out say­ing a word to me. I re­sumed my work, hop­ing he might give me some ex­pla­na­tion of the pre­vi­ous af­ter­noon’s events. He did noth­ing of the sort. I stared at him. His face looked ex­hausted; his red­dened eyes hadn’t been re­freshed by sleep; his fa­cial fea­tures ex­pressed pro­found sad­ness, real cha­grin. He walked up and down, sat and stood, picked up a book at ran­dom, dis­carded it im­me­di­ately, con­sulted his in­stru­ments with­out tak­ing his cus­tom­ary notes, and seemed un­able to rest easy for an in­stant.</p>
				<p>Fi­nally he came over to me and said:</p>
				<p>“Are you a physi­cian, Pro­fes­sor Aron­nax?”</p>
				<p>This in­quiry was so un­ex­pected that I stared at him a good while with­out re­ply­ing.</p>
				<p>“Are you a physi­cian?” he re­peated. “Sev­eral of your sci­en­tific col­leagues took their de­grees in medicine, such as Gra­ti­o­let, Mo­quin-Tan­don, and oth­ers.”</p>
				<p>“That’s right,” I said, “I am a doc­tor, I used to be on call at the hos­pi­tals. I was in prac­tice for sev­eral years be­fore join­ing the mu­seum.”</p>
				<p>“Ex­cel­lent, sir.”</p>
				<p>My re­ply ob­vi­ously pleased Cap­tain Nemo. But not know­ing what he was driv­ing at, I waited for fur­ther ques­tions, ready to re­ply as cir­cum­stances dic­tated.</p>
				<p>“Pro­fes­sor Aron­nax,” the cap­tain said to me, “would you con­sent to give your med­i­cal at­ten­tions to one of my men?”</p>
				<p>“Some­one is sick?”</p>
				<p>“Yes.”</p>
				<p>“I’m ready to go with you.”</p>
				<p>“Come.”</p>
				<p>I ad­mit that my heart was pound­ing. Lord knows why, but I saw a def­i­nite con­nec­tion be­tween this sick crew­man and yes­ter­day’s hap­pen­ings, and the mys­tery of those events con­cerned me at least as much as the man’s sick­ness.</p>
				<p>Cap­tain Nemo led me to the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i>’s stern and in­vited me into a cabin lo­cated next to the sailors’ quar­ters.</p>
				<p>On a bed there lay a man some forty years old, with strongly molded fea­tures, the very im­age of an An­glo-Saxon.</p>
				<p>I bent over him. Not only was he sick, he was wounded. Swathed in blood-soaked linen, his head was rest­ing on a folded pil­low. I un­did the linen ban­dages, while the wounded man gazed with great star­ing eyes and let me pro­ceed with­out mak­ing a sin­gle com­plaint.</p>
				<p>It was a hor­ri­ble wound. The cra­nium had been smashed open by some blunt in­stru­ment, leav­ing the naked brains ex­posed, and the cere­bral mat­ter had suf­fered deep abra­sions. Blood clots had formed in this dis­solv­ing mass, tak­ing on the color of wine dregs. Both con­tu­sion and con­cus­sion of the brain had oc­curred. The sick man’s breath­ing was la­bored, and mus­cle spasms quiv­ered in his face. Cere­bral in­flam­ma­tion was com­plete and had brought on a paral­y­sis of move­ment and sen­sa­tion.</p>
				<p>I took the wounded man’s pulse. It was in­ter­mit­tent. The body’s ex­trem­i­ties were al­ready grow­ing cold, and I saw that death was ap­proach­ing with­out any pos­si­bil­ity of my hold­ing it in check. After dress­ing the poor man’s wound, I re­did the linen ban­dages around his head, and I turned to Cap­tain Nemo.</p>
				<p>“How did he get this wound?” I asked him.</p>
				<p>“That’s not im­por­tant,” the cap­tain replied eva­sively. “The <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i> suf­fered a col­li­sion that cracked one of the en­gine levers, and it struck this man. My chief of­fi­cer was stand­ing be­side him. This man leaped for­ward to in­ter­cept the blow. A brother lays down his life for his brother, a friend for his friend, what could be sim­pler? That’s the law for ev­ery­one on board the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i>. But what’s your di­ag­no­sis of his con­di­tion?”</p>
				<p>I hes­i­tated to speak my mind.</p>
				<p>“You may talk freely,” the cap­tain told me. “This man doesn’t un­der­stand French.”</p>
				<p>I took a last look at the wounded man, then I replied:</p>
				<p>“This man will be dead in two hours.”</p>
				<p>“Noth­ing can save him?”</p>
				<p>“Noth­ing.”</p>
				<p>Cap­tain Nemo clenched his fists, and tears slid from his eyes, which I had thought in­ca­pable of weep­ing.</p>
				<p>For a few mo­ments more I ob­served the dy­ing man, whose life was ebbing lit­tle by lit­tle. He grew still more pale un­der the elec­tric light that bathed his deathbed. I looked at his in­tel­li­gent head, fur­rowed with pre­ma­ture wrin­kles that mis­for­tune, per­haps mis­ery, had etched long be­fore. I was hop­ing to de­tect the se­cret of his life in the last words that might es­cape from his lips!</p>
				<p>“You may go, Pro­fes­sor Aron­nax,” Cap­tain Nemo told me.</p>
				<p>I left the cap­tain in the dy­ing man’s cabin and I re­paired to my state­room, very moved by this scene. All day long I was aquiver with grue­some fore­bod­ings. That night I slept poorly, and be­tween my fit­ful dreams, I thought I heard a dis­tant moan­ing, like a fu­neral dirge. Was it a prayer for the dead, mur­mured in that lan­guage I couldn’t un­der­stand?</p>
				<p>The next morn­ing I climbed on deck. Cap­tain Nemo was al­ready there. As soon as he saw me, he came over.</p>
				<p>“Pro­fes­sor,” he said to me, “would it be con­ve­nient for you to make an un­der­wa­ter ex­cur­sion to­day?”</p>
				<p>“With my com­pan­ions?” I asked.</p>
				<p>“If they’re agree­able.”</p>
				<p>“We’re yours to com­mand, cap­tain.”</p>
				<p>“Then kindly put on your div­ing suits.”</p>
				<p>As for the dead or dy­ing man, he hadn’t come into the pic­ture. I re­joined Ned Land and Con­seil. I in­formed them of Cap­tain Nemo’s propo­si­tion. Con­seil was ea­ger to ac­cept, and this time the Cana­dian proved per­fectly amenable to go­ing with us.</p>
				<p>It was eight o’clock in the morn­ing. By 8:30 we were suited up for this new stroll and equipped with our two de­vices for light­ing and breath­ing. The dou­ble door opened, and ac­com­pa­nied by Cap­tain Nemo with a dozen crew­men fol­low­ing, we set foot on the firm seafloor where the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i> was rest­ing, ten me­ters down.</p>
				<p>A gen­tle slope grav­i­tated to an un­even bot­tom whose depth was about fif­teen fath­oms. This bot­tom was com­pletely dif­fer­ent from the one I had vis­ited dur­ing my first ex­cur­sion un­der the wa­ters of the Pa­cific Ocean. Here I saw no fine-grained sand, no un­der­wa­ter prairies, not one open-sea for­est. I im­me­di­ately rec­og­nized the won­drous re­gion in which Cap­tain Nemo did the hon­ors that day. It was the coral realm.</p>
				<p>In the zoophyte branch, class <i epub:type="z3998:taxonomy">Al­cy­onaria</i>, one finds the or­der <i epub:type="z3998:taxonomy">Gorg­onaria</i>, which con­tains three groups: sea fans, isid­ian polyps, and coral polyps. It’s in this last that pre­cious coral be­longs, an un­usual sub­stance that, at dif­fer­ent times, has been clas­si­fied in the min­eral, veg­etable, and an­i­mal king­doms. Medicine to the an­cients, jew­elry to the mod­erns, it wasn’t de­ci­sively placed in the an­i­mal king­dom un­til 1694, by Peyson­nel of Mar­seilles.</p>
				<p>A coral is a unit of tiny an­i­mals as­sem­bled over a poly­pary that’s brit­tle and stony in na­ture. Th­ese polyps have a unique gen­er­at­ing mech­a­nism that re­pro­duces them via the bud­ding process, and they have an in­di­vid­ual ex­is­tence while also par­tic­i­pat­ing in a com­mu­nal life. Hence they em­body a sort of nat­u­ral so­cial­ism. I was fa­mil­iar with the lat­est re­search on this bizarre zoophyte—which turns to stone while tak­ing on a tree form, as some nat­u­ral­ists have very aptly ob­served—and noth­ing could have been more fas­ci­nat­ing to me than to visit one of these pet­ri­fied forests that na­ture has planted on the bot­tom of the sea.</p>
				<p>We turned on our Ruhmko­rff de­vices and went along a coral shoal in the process of form­ing, which, given time, will some­day close off this whole part of the In­dian Ocean. Our path was bor­dered by hope­lessly tan­gled bushes, formed from snarls of shrubs all cov­ered with lit­tle star-shaped, white-streaked flow­ers. Only, con­trary to plants on shore, these tree forms be­come at­tached to rocks on the seafloor by head­ing from top to bot­tom.</p>
				<p>Our lights pro­duced a thou­sand de­light­ful ef­fects while play­ing over these brightly col­ored boughs. I fan­cied I saw these cylin­dri­cal, mem­brane-filled tubes trem­bling be­neath the wa­ter’s un­du­la­tions. I was tempted to gather their fresh petals, which were adorned with del­i­cate ten­ta­cles, some newly in bloom, oth­ers barely opened, while nim­ble fish with flut­ter­ing fins brushed past them like flocks of birds. But if my hands came near the mov­ing flow­ers of these sen­si­tive, lively crea­tures, an alarm would in­stantly sound through­out the colony. The white petals re­tracted into their red sheaths, the flow­ers van­ished be­fore my eyes, and the bush changed into a chunk of stony nip­ples.</p>
				<p>Sheer chance had placed me in the pres­ence of the most valu­able spec­i­mens of this zoophyte. This coral was the equal of those fished up from the Mediter­ranean off the Bar­bary Coast or the shores of France and Italy. With its bright col­ors, it lived up to those po­etic names of blood flower and blood foam that the in­dus­try con­fers on its finest ex­hibits. Co­ral sells for as much as 500 francs per kilo­gram, and in this lo­cal­ity the liq­uid strata hid enough to make the for­tunes of a whole host of coral fish­er­men. This valu­able sub­stance of­ten merges with other poly­paries, form­ing com­pact, hope­lessly tan­gled units known as <i>mac­ciota</i>, and I noted some won­der­ful pink sam­ples of this coral.</p>
				<p>But as the bushes shrank, the tree forms mag­ni­fied. Ac­tual pet­ri­fied thick­ets and long al­coves from some fan­tas­tic school of ar­chi­tec­ture kept open­ing up be­fore our steps. Cap­tain Nemo en­tered be­neath a dark gallery whose gen­tle slope took us to a depth of 100 me­ters. The light from our glass coils pro­duced mag­i­cal ef­fects at times, lin­ger­ing on the wrin­kled rough­ness of some nat­u­ral arch, or some over­hang sus­pended like a chan­de­lier, which our lamps flecked with fiery sparks. Amid these shrubs of pre­cious coral, I ob­served other polyps no less un­usual: melita coral, rain­bow coral with jointed out­growths, then a few tufts of genus <i epub:type="z3998:taxonomy">Co­ral­lina</i>, some green and oth­ers red, ac­tu­ally a type of sea­weed en­crusted with lime­stone salts, which, af­ter long dis­putes, nat­u­ral­ists have fi­nally placed in the veg­etable king­dom. But as one in­tel­lec­tual has re­marked, “Here, per­haps, is the ac­tual point where life rises humbly out of slum­ber­ing stone, but with­out break­ing away from its crude start­ing point.”</p>
				<p>Fi­nally, af­ter two hours of walk­ing, we reached a depth of about 300 me­ters, in other words, the low­er­most limit at which coral can be­gin to form. But here it was no longer some iso­lated bush or a mod­est grove of low tim­ber. It was an im­mense for­est, huge min­eral veg­e­ta­tion, enor­mous pet­ri­fied trees linked by gar­lands of el­e­gant hy­dras from the genus <i epub:type="z3998:taxonomy">Plu­mu­la­ria</i>, those trop­i­cal creep­ers of the sea, all decked out in shades and gleams. We passed freely un­der their lofty boughs, lost up in the shad­ows of the waves, while at our feet or­gan-pipe coral, stony coral, star coral, fun­gus coral, and sea anemone from the genus <i epub:type="z3998:taxonomy">Caryophylia</i> formed a car­pet of flow­ers all strewn with daz­zling gems.</p>
				<p>What an in­de­scrib­able sight! Oh, if only we could share our feel­ings! Why were we im­pris­oned be­hind these masks of metal and glass! Why were we for­bid­den to talk with each other! At least let us lead the lives of the fish that pop­u­late this liq­uid el­e­ment, or bet­ter yet, the lives of am­phib­ians, which can spend long hours ei­ther at sea or on shore, trav­el­ing through their dou­ble do­main as their whims dic­tate!</p>
				<p>Mean­while Cap­tain Nemo had called a halt. My com­pan­ions and I stopped walk­ing, and turn­ing around, I saw the crew­men form a semi­cir­cle around their leader. Look­ing with greater care, I ob­served that four of them were car­ry­ing on their shoul­ders an ob­ject that was ob­long in shape.</p>
				<p>At this lo­cal­ity we stood in the cen­ter of a huge clear­ing sur­rounded by the tall tree forms of this un­der­wa­ter for­est. Our lamps cast a sort of bril­liant twi­light over the area, mak­ing in­or­di­nately long shad­ows on the seafloor. Past the bound­aries of the clear­ing, the dark­ness deep­ened again, re­lieved only by lit­tle sparkles given off by the sharp crests of coral.</p>
				<p>Ned Land and Con­seil stood next to me. We stared, and it dawned on me that I was about to wit­ness a strange scene. Ob­serv­ing the seafloor, I saw that it swelled at cer­tain points from low bulges that were en­crusted with lime­stone de­posits and ar­ranged with a sym­me­try that be­trayed the hand of man.</p>
				<p>In the mid­dle of the clear­ing, on a pedestal of roughly piled rocks, there stood a cross of coral, ex­tend­ing long arms you would have thought were made of pet­ri­fied blood.</p>
				<p>At a sig­nal from Cap­tain Nemo, one of his men stepped for­ward and, a few feet from this cross, de­tached a mat­tock from his belt and be­gan to dig a hole.</p>
				<p>I fi­nally un­der­stood! This clear­ing was a ceme­tery, this hole a grave, that ob­long ob­ject the body of the man who must have died dur­ing the night! Cap­tain Nemo and his men had come to bury their com­pan­ion in this com­mu­nal rest­ing place on the in­ac­ces­si­ble ocean floor!</p>
				<p>No! My mind was reel­ing as never be­fore! Never had ideas of such im­pact raced through my brain! I didn’t want to see what my eyes saw!</p>
				<p>Mean­while the grave dig­ging went slowly. Fish fled here and there as their re­treat was dis­turbed. I heard the pick ring­ing on the lime­stone soil, its iron tip some­times giv­ing off sparks when it hit a stray piece of flint on the sea bot­tom. The hole grew longer, wider, and soon was deep enough to re­ceive the body.</p>
				<p>Then the pall­bear­ers ap­proached. Wrapped in white fab­ric made from fil­a­ments of the fan mus­sel, the body was low­ered into its wa­tery grave. Cap­tain Nemo, arms crossed over his chest, knelt in a pos­ture of prayer, as did all the friends of him who had loved them. … My two com­pan­ions and I bowed rev­er­ently.</p>
				<p>The grave was then cov­ered over with the rub­ble dug from the seafloor, and it formed a low mound.</p>
				<p>When this was done, Cap­tain Nemo and his men stood up; then they all ap­proached the grave, sank again on bended knee, and ex­tended their hands in a sign of fi­nal farewell. …</p>
				<p>Then the fu­neral party went back up the path to the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i>, re­turn­ing be­neath the arches of the for­est, through the thick­ets, along the coral bushes, go­ing steadily higher.</p>
				<p>Fi­nally the ship’s rays ap­peared. Their lu­mi­nous trail guided us to the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i>. By one o’clock we had re­turned.</p>
				<p>After chang­ing clothes, I climbed onto the plat­form, and in the grip of dread­fully ob­ses­sive thoughts, I sat next to the bea­con.</p>
				<p>Cap­tain Nemo re­joined me. I stood up and said to him:</p>
				<p>“So, as I pre­dicted, that man died dur­ing the night?”</p>
				<p>“Yes, Pro­fes­sor Aron­nax,” Cap­tain Nemo replied.</p>
				<p>“And now he rests be­side his com­pan­ions in that coral ceme­tery?”</p>
				<p>“Yes, for­got­ten by the world but not by us! We dig the graves, then en­trust the polyps with seal­ing away our dead for eter­nity!”</p>
				<p>And with a sud­den ges­ture, the cap­tain hid his face in his clenched fists, vainly try­ing to hold back a sob. Then he added:</p>
				<p>“There lies our peace­ful ceme­tery, hun­dreds of feet be­neath the sur­face of the waves!”</p>
				<p>“At least, cap­tain, your dead can sleep serenely there, out of the reach of sharks!”</p>
				<p>“Yes, sir,” Cap­tain Nemo replied solemnly, “of sharks and men!”</p>
			</section>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
