<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="en-US" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: http://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Chapter 21</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="part-1" epub:type="part">
			<section id="chapter-1-21" epub:type="chapter">
				<h3 epub:type="title">
					<span class="first-child" epub:type="z3998:roman">XXI</span>
					<span class="epub-type-subtitle" epub:type="subtitle">Some Days Ashore</span>
				</h3>
				<p>Step­ping ashore had an ex­hil­a­rat­ing ef­fect on me. Ned Land tested the soil with his foot, as if he were lay­ing claim to it. Yet it had been only two months since we had be­come, as Cap­tain Nemo ex­pressed it, “pas­sen­gers on the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i>,” in other words, the lit­eral pris­on­ers of its com­man­der.</p>
				<p>In a few min­utes we were a gun­shot away from the coast. The soil was al­most en­tirely madreporic, but cer­tain dry stream beds were strewn with gran­ite rub­ble, prov­ing that this is­land was of pri­mor­dial ori­gin. The en­tire hori­zon was hid­den be­hind a cur­tain of won­der­ful forests. Enor­mous trees, some­times as high as 200 feet, were linked to each other by gar­lands of trop­i­cal creep­ers, gen­uine nat­u­ral ham­mocks that swayed in a mild breeze. There were mi­mosas, banyan trees, beef­wood, teak­wood, hi­bis­cus, screw pines, palm trees, all min­gling in wild pro­fu­sion; and be­neath the shade of their green canopies, at the feet of their gi­gan­tic trunks, there grew or­chids, legu­mi­nous plants, and ferns.</p>
				<p>Mean­while, ig­nor­ing all these fine spec­i­mens of Pa­puan flora, the Cana­dian passed up the dec­o­ra­tive in fa­vor of the func­tional. He spot­ted a co­conut palm, beat down some of its fruit, broke them open, and we drank their milk and ate their meat with a plea­sure that was a protest against our stan­dard fare on the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i>.</p>
				<p>“Ex­cel­lent!” Ned Land said.</p>
				<p>“Exquisite!” Con­seil replied.</p>
				<p>“And I don’t think,” the Cana­dian said, “that your Nemo would ob­ject to us stash­ing a cargo of co­conuts aboard his ves­sel?”</p>
				<p>“I imag­ine not,” I replied, “but he won’t want to sam­ple them.”</p>
				<p>“Too bad for him!” Con­seil said.</p>
				<p>“And plenty good for us!” Ned Land shot back. “There’ll be more left over!”</p>
				<p>“A word of cau­tion, Mr. Land,” I told the har­pooner, who was about to rav­age an­other co­conut palm. “Co­conuts are ad­mirable things, but be­fore we stuff the skiff with them, it would be wise to find out whether this is­land of­fers other sub­stances just as use­ful. Some fresh veg­eta­bles would be well re­ceived in the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i>’s pantry.”</p>
				<p>“Master is right,” Con­seil replied, “and I pro­pose that we set aside three places in our long­boat: one for fruit, an­other for veg­eta­bles, and a third for veni­son, of which I still haven’t glimpsed the tini­est spec­i­men.”</p>
				<p>“Don’t give up so eas­ily, Con­seil,” the Cana­dian replied.</p>
				<p>“So let’s con­tinue our ex­cur­sion,” I went on, “but keep a sharp look­out. This is­land seems un­in­hab­ited, but it still might har­bor cer­tain in­di­vid­u­als who aren’t so finicky about the sort of game they eat!”</p>
				<p>“Hee hee!” Ned put in, with a mean­ing­ful move­ment of his jaws.</p>
				<p>“Ned! Oh hor­rors!” Con­seil ex­claimed.</p>
				<p>“Ye gods,” the Cana­dian shot back, “I’m start­ing to ap­pre­ci­ate the charms of can­ni­bal­ism!”</p>
				<p>“Ned, Ned! Don’t say that!” Con­seil an­swered. “You a can­ni­bal? Why, I’ll no longer be safe next to you, I who share your cabin! Does this mean I’ll wake up half de­voured one fine day?”</p>
				<p>“I’m aw­fully fond of you, Con­seil my friend, but not enough to eat you when there’s bet­ter food around.”</p>
				<p>“Then I daren’t de­lay,” Con­seil replied. “The hunt is on! We ab­so­lutely must bag some game to pla­cate this man-eater, or one of these morn­ings mas­ter won’t find enough pieces of his manser­vant to serve him.”</p>
				<p>While ex­chang­ing this chitchat, we en­tered be­neath the dark canopies of the for­est, and for two hours we ex­plored it in ev­ery di­rec­tion.</p>
				<p>We couldn’t have been luck­ier in our search for ed­i­ble veg­e­ta­tion, and some of the most use­ful pro­duce in the trop­i­cal zones sup­plied us with a valu­able food­stuff miss­ing on board.</p>
				<p>I mean the bread­fruit tree, which is quite abun­dant on Gue­boroa Is­land, and there I chiefly noted the seed­less va­ri­ety that in Malaysia is called <i lang="ms" xml:lang="ms">rima</i>.</p>
				<p>This tree is dis­tin­guished from other trees by a straight trunk forty feet high. To the nat­u­ral­ist’s eye, its grace­fully rounded crown, formed of big mul­ti­lobed leaves, was enough to de­note the <i epub:type="z3998:taxonomy">ar­to­car­pus</i> that has been so suc­cess­fully trans­planted to the Mas­carene Is­lands east of Mada­gas­car. From its mass of green­ery, huge glob­u­lar fruit stood out, a decime­ter wide and fur­nished on the out­side with creases that as­sumed a hexan­gu­lar pat­tern. It’s a handy plant that na­ture gives to re­gions lack­ing in wheat; with­out need­ing to be cul­ti­vated, it bears fruit eight months out of the year.</p>
				<p>Ned Land was on fa­mil­iar terms with this fruit. He had al­ready eaten it on his many voy­ages and knew how to cook its ed­i­ble sub­stance. So the very sight of it aroused his ap­petite, and he couldn’t con­trol him­self.</p>
				<p>“Sir,” he told me, “I’ll die if I don’t sam­ple a lit­tle bread­fruit pasta!”</p>
				<p>“Sam­ple some, Ned my friend, sam­ple all you like. We’re here to con­duct ex­per­i­ments, let’s con­duct them.”</p>
				<p>“It won’t take a minute,” the Cana­dian replied.</p>
				<p>Equipped with a mag­ni­fy­ing glass, he lit a fire of dead­wood that was soon crack­ling mer­rily. Mean­while Con­seil and I se­lected the finest <i epub:type="z3998:taxonomy">ar­to­car­pus</i> fruit. Some still weren’t ripe enough, and their thick skins cov­ered white, slightly fi­brous pulps. But a great many oth­ers were yel­low­ish and gelati­nous, just beg­ging to be picked.</p>
				<p>This fruit con­tained no pits. Con­seil brought a dozen of them to Ned Land, who cut them into thick slices and placed them over a fire of live coals, all the while re­peat­ing:</p>
				<p>“You’ll see, sir, how tasty this bread is!”</p>
				<p>“Espe­cially since we’ve gone with­out baked goods for so long,” Con­seil said.</p>
				<p>“It’s more than just bread,” the Cana­dian added. “It’s a dainty pas­try. You’ve never eaten any, sir?”</p>
				<p>“No, Ned.”</p>
				<p>“All right, get ready for some­thing down­right de­lec­ta­ble! If you don’t come back for sec­onds, I’m no longer the King of Har­poon­ers!”</p>
				<p>After a few min­utes, the parts of the fruit ex­posed to the fire were com­pletely toasted. On the in­side there ap­peared some white pasta, a sort of soft bread cen­ter whose fla­vor re­minded me of ar­ti­choke.</p>
				<p>This bread was ex­cel­lent, I must ad­mit, and I ate it with great plea­sure.</p>
				<p>“Un­for­tu­nately,” I said, “this pasta won’t stay fresh, so it seems point­less to make a sup­ply for on board.”</p>
				<p>“By thun­der, sir!” Ned Land ex­claimed. “There you go, talk­ing like a nat­u­ral­ist, but mean­time I’ll be act­ing like a baker! Con­seil, har­vest some of this fruit to take with us when we go back.”</p>
				<p>“And how will you pre­pare it?” I asked the Cana­dian.</p>
				<p>“I’ll make a fer­mented bat­ter from its pulp that’ll keep in­def­i­nitely with­out spoil­ing. When I want some, I’ll just cook it in the gal­ley on board—it’ll have a slightly tart fla­vor, but you’ll find it ex­cel­lent.”</p>
				<p>“So, Mr. Ned, I see that this bread is all we need—”</p>
				<p>“Not quite, pro­fes­sor,” the Cana­dian replied. “We need some fruit to go with it, or at least some veg­eta­bles.”</p>
				<p>“Then let’s look for fruit and veg­eta­bles.”</p>
				<p>When our bread­fruit har­vest­ing was done, we took to the trail to com­plete this “dry-land din­ner.”</p>
				<p>We didn’t search in vain, and near noon­time we had an am­ple sup­ply of ba­nanas. This de­li­cious pro­duce from the Tor­rid Zones ripens all year round, and Malaysians, who give them the name <i lang="ms" xml:lang="ms">pisang</i>, eat them with­out both­er­ing to cook them. In ad­di­tion to ba­nanas, we gath­ered some enor­mous jack­fruit with a very tangy fla­vor, some tasty man­goes, and some pineap­ples of un­be­liev­able size. But this for­ag­ing took up a good deal of our time, which, even so, we had no cause to re­gret.</p>
				<p>Con­seil kept Ned un­der ob­ser­va­tion. The har­pooner walked in the lead, and dur­ing his stroll through this for­est, he gath­ered with sure hands some ex­cel­lent fruit that should have com­pleted his pro­vi­sions.</p>
				<p>“So,” Con­seil asked, “you have ev­ery­thing you need, Ned my friend?”</p>
				<p>“Humph!” the Cana­dian put in.</p>
				<p>“What! You’re com­plain­ing?”</p>
				<p>“All this veg­e­ta­tion doesn’t make a meal,” Ned replied. “Just side dishes, dessert. But where’s the soup course? Where’s the roast?”</p>
				<p>“Right,” I said. “Ned promised us cut­lets, which seems highly ques­tion­able to me.”</p>
				<p>“Sir,” the Cana­dian replied, “our hunt­ing not only isn’t over, it hasn’t even started. Pa­tience! We’re sure to end up bump­ing into some an­i­mal with ei­ther feath­ers or fur, if not in this lo­cal­ity, then in an­other.”</p>
				<p>“And if not to­day, then to­mor­row, be­cause we mustn’t wan­der too far off,” Con­seil added. “That’s why I pro­pose that we re­turn to the skiff.”</p>
				<p>“What! Al­ready!” Ned ex­claimed.</p>
				<p>“We ought to be back be­fore night­fall,” I said.</p>
				<p>“But what hour is it, then?” the Cana­dian asked.</p>
				<p>“Two o’clock at least,” Con­seil replied.</p>
				<p>“How time flies on solid ground!” ex­claimed Mr. Ned Land with a sigh of re­gret.</p>
				<p>“Off we go!” Con­seil replied.</p>
				<p>So we re­turned through the for­est, and we com­pleted our har­vest by mak­ing a clean sweep of some palm cab­bages that had to be picked from the crowns of their trees, some small beans that I rec­og­nized as the <i lang="ms" xml:lang="ms">abrou</i> of the Malaysians, and some high-qual­ity yams.</p>
				<p>We were over­loaded when we ar­rived at the skiff. How­ever, Ned Land still found these pro­vi­sions in­ad­e­quate. But for­tune smiled on him. Just as we were board­ing, he spot­ted sev­eral trees twenty-five to thirty feet high, be­long­ing to the palm species. As valu­able as the <i epub:type="z3998:taxonomy">ar­to­car­pus</i>, these trees are justly ranked among the most use­ful pro­duce in Malaysia.</p>
				<p>They were sago palms, veg­e­ta­tion that grows with­out be­ing cul­ti­vated; like mul­berry trees, they re­pro­duce by means of shoots and seeds.</p>
				<p>Ned Land knew how to han­dle these trees. Tak­ing his ax and wield­ing it with great vigor, he soon stretched out on the ground two or three sago palms, whose ma­tu­rity was re­vealed by the white dust sprin­kled over their palm fronds.</p>
				<p>I watched him more as a nat­u­ral­ist than as a man in hunger. He be­gan by re­mov­ing from each trunk an inch-thick strip of bark that cov­ered a net­work of long, hope­lessly tan­gled fibers that were put­tied with a sort of gummy flour. This flour was the starch-like sago, an ed­i­ble sub­stance chiefly con­sumed by the Me­lane­sian peo­ples.</p>
				<p>For the time be­ing, Ned Land was con­tent to chop these trunks into pieces, as if he were mak­ing fire­wood; later he would ex­tract the flour by sift­ing it through cloth to sep­a­rate it from its fi­brous lig­a­ments, let it dry out in the sun, and leave it to harden in­side molds.</p>
				<p>Fi­nally, at five o’clock in the af­ter­noon, laden with all our trea­sures, we left the is­land beach and half an hour later pulled along­side the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i>. No­body ap­peared on our ar­rival. The enor­mous sheet-iron cylin­der seemed de­serted. Our pro­vi­sions loaded on board, I went be­low to my state­room. There I found my sup­per ready. I ate and then fell asleep.</p>
				<p>The next day, Jan­uary 6: noth­ing new on board. Not a sound in­side, not a sign of life. The skiff stayed along­side in the same place we had left it. We de­cided to re­turn to Gue­boroa Is­land. Ned Land hoped for bet­ter luck in his hunt­ing than on the day be­fore, and he wanted to visit a dif­fer­ent part of the for­est.</p>
				<p>By sun­rise we were off. Car­ried by an in­bound cur­rent, the long­boat reached the is­land in a mat­ter of mo­ments.</p>
				<p>We dis­em­barked, and think­ing it best to abide by the Cana­dian’s in­stincts, we fol­lowed Ned Land, whose long legs threat­ened to out­pace us.</p>
				<p>Ned Land went west­ward up the coast; then, ford­ing some stream beds, he reached open plains that were bor­dered by won­der­ful forests. Some king­fish­ers lurked along the wa­ter­courses, but they didn’t let us ap­proach. Their cau­tious be­hav­ior proved to me that these winged crea­tures knew where they stood on bipeds of our species, and I con­cluded that if this is­land wasn’t in­hab­ited, at least hu­man be­ings paid it fre­quent vis­its.</p>
				<p>After cross­ing a pretty lush prairie, we ar­rived on the out­skirts of a small wood, en­livened by the singing and soar­ing of a large num­ber of birds.</p>
				<p>“Still, they’re merely birds,” Con­seil said.</p>
				<p>“But some are ed­i­ble,” the har­pooner replied.</p>
				<p>“Wrong, Ned my friend,” Con­seil an­swered, “be­cause I see only or­di­nary par­rots here.”</p>
				<p>“Con­seil my friend,” Ned replied in all se­ri­ous­ness, “par­rots are like pheas­ant to peo­ple with noth­ing else on their plates.”</p>
				<p>“And I might add,” I said, “that when these birds are prop­erly cooked, they’re at least worth a stab of the fork.”</p>
				<p>In­deed, un­der the dense fo­liage of this wood, a whole host of par­rots flut­tered from branch to branch, need­ing only the proper up­bring­ing to speak hu­man di­alects. At present they were cack­ling in cho­rus with para­keets of ev­ery color, with solemn cock­a­toos that seemed to be pon­der­ing some philo­soph­i­cal prob­lem, while bright red lo­ries passed by like pieces of bunting borne on the breeze, in the midst of kalao par­rots rau­cously on the wing, Pa­puan lo­ries painted the sub­tlest shades of azure, and a whole va­ri­ety of de­light­ful winged crea­tures, none ter­ri­bly ed­i­ble.</p>
				<p>How­ever, one bird unique to these shores, which never passes be­yond the bound­aries of the Aru and Pa­puan Is­lands, was miss­ing from this col­lec­tion. But I was given a chance to mar­vel at it soon enough.</p>
				<p>After cross­ing through a mod­er­ately dense thicket, we again found some plains ob­structed by bushes. There I saw some mag­nif­i­cent birds soar­ing aloft, the ar­range­ment of their long feath­ers caus­ing them to head into the wind. Their un­du­lat­ing flight, the grace of their aerial curves, and the play of their col­ors al­lured and de­lighted the eye. I had no trou­ble iden­ti­fy­ing them.</p>
				<p>“Birds of par­adise!” I ex­claimed.</p>
				<p>“Order <i epub:type="z3998:taxonomy">Passer­i­forma</i>, di­vi­sion <i epub:type="z3998:taxonomy">Clystomora</i>,” Con­seil replied.</p>
				<p>“Par­tridge fam­ily?” Ned Land asked.</p>
				<p>“I doubt it, Mr. Land. Nev­er­the­less, I’m count­ing on your dex­ter­ity to catch me one of these de­light­ful rep­re­sen­ta­tives of trop­i­cal na­ture!”</p>
				<p>“I’ll give it a try, pro­fes­sor, though I’m hand­ier with a har­poon than a ri­fle.”</p>
				<p>Malaysians, who do a boom­ing busi­ness in these birds with the Chi­nese, have var­i­ous meth­ods for catch­ing them that we couldn’t use. Some­times they set snares on the tops of the tall trees that the bird of par­adise prefers to in­habit. At other times they cap­ture it with a tena­cious glue that par­a­lyzes its move­ments. They will even go so far as to poi­son the springs where these fowl ha­bit­u­ally drink. But in our case, all we could do was fire at them on the wing, which left us lit­tle chance of get­ting one. And in truth, we used up a good part of our am­mu­ni­tion in vain.</p>
				<p>Near eleven o’clock in the morn­ing, we cleared the lower slopes of the moun­tains that form the is­land’s cen­ter, and we still hadn’t bagged a thing. Hunger spurred us on. The hunters had counted on con­sum­ing the pro­ceeds of their hunt­ing, and they had mis­cal­cu­lated. Luck­ily, and much to his sur­prise, Con­seil pulled off a right-and-left shot and in­sured our break­fast. He brought down a white pi­geon and a ring­dove, which were briskly plucked, hung from a spit, and roasted over a blaz­ing fire of dead­wood. While these fas­ci­nat­ing an­i­mals were cook­ing, Ned pre­pared some bread from the <i epub:type="z3998:taxonomy">ar­to­car­pus</i>. Then the pi­geon and ring­dove were de­voured to the bones and de­clared ex­cel­lent. Nut­meg, on which these birds ha­bit­u­ally gorge them­selves, sweet­ens their flesh and makes it de­li­cious eat­ing.</p>
				<p>“They taste like chicken stuffed with truf­fles,” Con­seil said.</p>
				<p>“All right, Ned,” I asked the Cana­dian, “now what do you need?”</p>
				<p>“Game with four paws, Pro­fes­sor Aron­nax,” Ned Land replied. “All these pi­geons are only ap­pe­tiz­ers, snacks. So till I’ve bagged an an­i­mal with cut­lets, I won’t be happy!”</p>
				<p>“Nor I, Ned, un­til I’ve caught a bird of par­adise.”</p>
				<p>“Then let’s keep hunt­ing,” Con­seil replied, “but while head­ing back to the sea. We’ve ar­rived at the foothills of these moun­tains, and I think we’ll do bet­ter if we re­turn to the for­est re­gions.”</p>
				<p>It was good ad­vice and we took it. After an hour’s walk we reached a gen­uine sago palm for­est. A few harm­less snakes fled un­der­foot. Birds of par­adise stole off at our ap­proach, and I was in real de­spair of catch­ing one when Con­seil, walk­ing in the lead, stooped sud­denly, gave a tri­umphant shout, and came back to me, car­ry­ing a mag­nif­i­cent bird of par­adise.</p>
				<p>“Oh bravo, Con­seil!” I ex­claimed.</p>
				<p>“Master is too kind,” Con­seil replied.</p>
				<p>“Not at all, my boy. That was a stroke of ge­nius, catch­ing one of these live birds with your bare hands!”</p>
				<p>“If mas­ter will ex­am­ine it closely, he’ll see that I de­serve no great praise.”</p>
				<p>“And why not, Con­seil?”</p>
				<p>“Be­cause this bird is as drunk as a lord.”</p>
				<p>“Drunk?”</p>
				<p>“Yes, mas­ter, drunk from the nut­megs it was de­vour­ing un­der that nut­meg tree where I caught it. See, Ned my friend, see the mon­strous re­sults of in­tem­per­ance!”</p>
				<p>“Dam­na­tion!” the Cana­dian shot back. “Con­sid­er­ing the amount of gin I’ve had these past two months, you’ve got noth­ing to com­plain about!”</p>
				<p>Mean­while I was ex­am­in­ing this un­usual bird. Con­seil was not mis­taken. Tipsy from that po­tent juice, our bird of par­adise had been re­duced to help­less­ness. It was un­able to fly. It was barely able to walk. But this didn’t alarm me, and I just let it sleep off its nut­meg.</p>
				<p>This bird be­longed to the finest of the eight species cred­ited to Pa­pua and its neigh­bor­ing is­lands. It was a “great emer­ald,” one of the rarest birds of par­adise. It mea­sured three decime­ters long. Its head was com­par­a­tively small, and its eyes, placed near the open­ing of its beak, were also small. But it of­fered a won­der­ful mix­ture of hues: a yel­low beak, brown feet and claws, hazel wings with pur­ple tips, pale yel­low head and scruff of the neck, emer­ald throat, the belly and chest ma­roon to brown. Two strands, made of a horn sub­stance cov­ered with down, rose over its tail, which was length­ened by long, very light feath­ers of won­der­ful fine­ness, and they com­pleted the cos­tume of this mar­velous bird that the is­landers have po­et­i­cally named “the sun bird.”</p>
				<p>How I wished I could take this su­perb bird of par­adise back to Paris, to make a gift of it to the zoo at the Botan­i­cal Gar­dens, which doesn’t own a sin­gle live spec­i­men.</p>
				<p>“So it must be a rar­ity or some­thing?” the Cana­dian asked, in the tone of a hunter who, from the view­point of his art, gives the game a pretty low rat­ing.</p>
				<p>“A great rar­ity, my gal­lant com­rade, and above all very hard to cap­ture alive. And even af­ter they’re dead, there’s still a ma­jor mar­ket for these birds. So the na­tives have fig­ured out how to cre­ate fake ones, like peo­ple cre­ate fake pearls or di­a­monds.”</p>
				<p>“What!” Con­seil ex­claimed. “They make coun­ter­feit birds of par­adise?”</p>
				<p>“Yes, Con­seil.”</p>
				<p>“And is mas­ter fa­mil­iar with how the is­landers go about it?”</p>
				<p>“Per­fectly fa­mil­iar. Dur­ing the east­erly mon­soon sea­son, birds of par­adise lose the mag­nif­i­cent feath­ers around their tails that nat­u­ral­ists call ‘be­low-the-wing’ feath­ers. Th­ese feath­ers are gath­ered by the fowl forg­ers and skill­fully fit­ted onto some poor pre­vi­ously mu­ti­lated para­keet. Then they paint over the su­ture, var­nish the bird, and ship the fruits of their unique labors to mu­se­ums and col­lec­tors in Europe.”</p>
				<p>“Good enough!” Ned Land put in. “If it isn’t the right bird, it’s still the right feath­ers, and so long as the mer­chan­dise isn’t meant to be eaten, I see no great harm!”</p>
				<p>But if my de­sires were ful­filled by the cap­ture of this bird of par­adise, those of our Cana­dian hunts­man re­mained un­sat­is­fied. Luck­ily, near two o’clock Ned Land brought down a mag­nif­i­cent wild pig of the type the na­tives call <i lang="x-tribal" xml:lang="x-tribal">bari-out­ang</i>. This an­i­mal came in the nick of time for us to bag some real quadruped meat, and it was warmly wel­comed. Ned Land proved him­self quite glo­ri­ously with his gun­shot. Hit by an elec­tric bul­let, the pig dropped dead on the spot.</p>
				<p>The Cana­dian prop­erly skinned and cleaned it, af­ter re­mov­ing half a dozen cut­lets des­tined to serve as the grilled meat course of our evening meal. Then the hunt was on again, and once more would be marked by the ex­ploits of Ned and Con­seil.</p>
				<p>In essence, beat­ing the bushes, the two friends flushed a herd of kan­ga­roos that fled by bound­ing away on their elas­tic paws. But these an­i­mals didn’t flee so swiftly that our elec­tric cap­sules couldn’t catch up with them.</p>
				<p>“Oh, pro­fes­sor!” shouted Ned Land, whose hunt­ing fever had gone to his brain. “What ex­cel­lent game, es­pe­cially in a stew! What a sup­ply for the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i>! Two, three, five down! And just think how we’ll de­vour all this meat our­selves, while those numb­skulls on board won’t get a shred!”</p>
				<p>In his un­con­trol­lable glee, I think the Cana­dian might have slaugh­tered the whole horde, if he hadn’t been so busy talk­ing! But he was con­tent with a dozen of these fas­ci­nat­ing mar­su­pi­als, which make up the first or­der of apla­cen­tal mam­mals, as Con­seil just had to tell us.</p>
				<p>Th­ese an­i­mals were small in stature. They were a species of those “rab­bit kan­ga­roos” that usu­ally dwell in the hol­lows of trees and are tremen­dously fast; but al­though of mod­er­ate di­men­sions, they at least fur­nish a meat that’s highly prized.</p>
				<p>We were thor­oughly sat­is­fied with the re­sults of our hunt­ing. A glee­ful Ned pro­posed that we re­turn the next day to this magic is­land, which he planned to de­pop­u­late of its ev­ery ed­i­ble quadruped. But he was reck­on­ing with­out events.</p>
				<p>By six o’clock in the evening, we were back on the beach. The skiff was aground in its usual place. The <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i>, look­ing like a long reef, emerged from the waves two miles off­shore.</p>
				<p>Without fur­ther ado, Ned Land got down to the im­por­tant busi­ness of din­ner. He came won­der­fully to terms with its en­tire cook­ing. Grilling over the coals, those cut­lets from the <i lang="x-tribal" xml:lang="x-tribal">bari-out­ang</i> soon gave off a suc­cu­lent aroma that per­fumed the air.</p>
				<p>But I catch my­self fol­low­ing in the Cana­dian’s foot­steps. Look at me—in ec­stasy over freshly grilled pork! Please grant me a par­don as I’ve al­ready granted one to Mr. Land, and on the same grounds!</p>
				<p>In short, din­ner was ex­cel­lent. Two ring­doves rounded out this ex­tra­or­di­nary menu. Sago pasta, bread from the <i epub:type="z3998:taxonomy">ar­to­car­pus</i>, man­goes, half a dozen pineap­ples, and the fer­mented liquor from cer­tain co­conuts height­ened our glee. I sus­pect that my two fine com­pan­ions weren’t quite as clear­headed as one could wish.</p>
				<p>“What if we don’t re­turn to the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i> this evening?” Con­seil said.</p>
				<p>“What if we never re­turn to it?” Ned Land added.</p>
				<p>Just then a stone whizzed to­ward us, landed at our feet, and cut short the har­pooner’s propo­si­tion.</p>
			</section>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
