<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="en-US" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: http://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Introduction</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="frontmatter z3998:non-fiction">
		<section id="introduction" epub:type="introduction">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Introduction</h2>
			<p>“The deep­est parts of the ocean are to­tally un­known to us,” ad­mits Pro­fes­sor Aron­nax early in this novel. “What goes on in those dis­tant depths? What crea­tures in­habit, or could in­habit, those re­gions twelve or fif­teen miles be­neath the sur­face of the wa­ter? It’s al­most be­yond con­jec­ture.”</p>
			<p>Jules Verne (1828–1905) pub­lished the French equiv­a­lents of these words in 1869, and lit­tle has changed since. 126 years later, a <i epub:type="se:name.publication.magazine">Time</i> cover story on deep-sea ex­plo­ration made much the same ad­mis­sion: “We know more about Mars than we know about the oceans.” This re­al­ity be­gins to ex­plain the dark power and oth­er­worldly fas­ci­na­tion of <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Twenty Thou­sand Leagues Un­der the Seas</i>.</p>
			<p>Born in the French river town of Nantes, Verne had a life­long pas­sion for the sea. First as a Paris stock­bro­ker, later as a cel­e­brated au­thor and yachts­man, he went on fre­quent voy­ages—to Bri­tain, Amer­ica, the Mediter­ranean. But the spe­cific stim­u­lus for this novel was an 1865 fan let­ter from a fel­low writer, Madame Ge­orge Sand. She praised Verne’s two early nov­els <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Five Weeks in a Bal­loon</i> (1863) and <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Jour­ney to the Cen­ter of the Earth</i> (1864), then added: “Soon I hope you’ll take us into the ocean depths, your char­ac­ters trav­el­ing in div­ing equip­ment per­fected by your sci­ence and your imag­i­na­tion.” Thus in­spired, Verne cre­ated one of lit­er­a­ture’s great rebels, a free­dom fighter who plunged be­neath the waves to wage a unique form of guerilla war­fare.</p>
			<p>Ini­tially, Verne’s nar­ra­tive was in­flu­enced by the 1863 up­ris­ing of Poland against Tsarist Rus­sia. The Poles were quashed with a vi­o­lence that ap­palled not only Verne but all Europe. As orig­i­nally con­ceived, Verne’s Cap­tain Nemo was a Pol­ish no­ble­man whose en­tire fam­ily had been slaugh­tered by Rus­sian troops. Nemo builds a fab­u­lous fu­tur­is­tic sub­ma­rine, the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i>, then con­ducts an un­der­wa­ter cam­paign of vengeance against his im­pe­ri­al­ist op­pres­sor.</p>
			<p>But in the 1860s France had to treat the Tsar as an ally, and Verne’s pub­lisher Pierre Het­zel pro­nounced the book un­print­able. Verne re­worked its po­lit­i­cal con­tent, de­vis­ing new na­tion­al­i­ties for Nemo and his great en­emy—in­for­ma­tion re­vealed only in a later novel, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">The Mys­te­ri­ous Is­land</i> (1875); in the present work Nemo’s back­ground re­mains a dark se­cret. In all, the novel had a dif­fi­cult ges­ta­tion. Verne and Het­zel were in con­stant con­flict and the book went through mul­ti­ple drafts, strug­gles re­flected in its sev­eral work­ing ti­tles over the pe­riod 1865–69: early on, it was var­i­ously called <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Voy­age Un­der the Waters</i>, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Twenty-five Thou­sand Leagues Un­der the Waters</i>, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Twenty Thou­sand Leagues Un­der the Waters</i>, and <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">A Thou­sand Leagues Un­der the Oceans</i>.</p>
			<p>Verne is of­ten dubbed, in Isaac Asi­mov’s phrase, “the world’s first sci­ence-fic­tion writer.” And it’s true, many of his sixty-odd books do an­tic­i­pate fu­ture events and tech­nolo­gies: <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">From the Earth to the Moon</i> (1865) and <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Hec­tor Ser­vadac</i> (1877) deal in space travel, while <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Jour­ney to the Cen­ter of the Earth</i> fea­tures travel to the earth’s core. But with Verne the op­er­a­tive word is “travel,” and some of his best-known ti­tles don’t re­ally qual­ify as sci-fi: <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Around the World in Eighty Days</i> (1872) and <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Michael Stro­goff</i> (1876) are closer to “trav­el­ogs”—ad­ven­ture yarns in far­away places.</p>
			<p>Th­ese ob­ser­va­tions partly ap­ply here. The sub­ti­tle of the present book is “An Un­der­wa­ter Tour of the World,” so in good trav­elog style, the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i>’s ex­ploits sup­ply an episodic story line. Shark at­tacks, gi­ant squid, can­ni­bals, hur­ri­canes, whale hunts, and other rip-roar­ing ad­ven­tures erupt al­most at ran­dom. Yet this loose struc­ture gives the novel an air of doc­u­men­tary re­al­ism. What’s more, Verne adds back­bone to the ac­tion by de­vel­op­ing three re­cur­ring mo­tifs: the deep­en­ing mys­tery of Nemo’s past life and fu­ture in­ten­tions, the mount­ing ten­sion be­tween Nemo and hot-tem­pered har­pooner Ned Land, and Ned’s on­go­ing schemes to es­cape from the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i>. Th­ese uni­fy­ing threads tighten the nar­ra­tive and ac­cel­er­ate its mo­men­tum.</p>
			<p>Other sub­tleties oc­cur in­side each episode, the tex­tures sparkling with wit, in­for­ma­tion, and in­sight. Verne re­gards the sea from many an­gles: in the do­main of ma­rine bi­ol­ogy, he gives us thumb­nail sketches of fish, seashells, coral, some­times in great cat­a­logs that swirl past like mu­si­cal cas­cades; in the realm of ge­ol­ogy, he stud­ies vol­ca­noes lit­er­ally in­side and out; in the world of com­merce, he cel­e­brates the high-en­ergy en­trepreneurs who lay the At­lantic Cable or dig the Suez Canal. And Verne’s ma­rine en­gi­neer­ing proves es­pe­cially au­thor­i­ta­tive. His spec­i­fi­ca­tions for an open-sea sub­ma­rine and a self-con­tained div­ing suit were decades be­fore their time, yet mod­ern tech­nol­ogy bears them out tri­umphantly.</p>
			<p>True, to­day’s sci­en­tists know a few things he didn’t: the South Pole isn’t at the wa­ter’s edge but far in­land; sharks don’t flip over be­fore at­tack­ing; gi­ant squid sport ten ten­ta­cles not eight; sperm whales don’t prey on their whale­bone cousins. This not­with­stand­ing, Verne fur­nishes the most evoca­tive por­trayal of the ocean depths be­fore the ar­rival of Jac­ques Cousteau and tech­ni­color film.</p>
			<p>Lastly the book has stature as a novel of char­ac­ter. Even the sup­port­ing cast is shrewdly drawn: Pro­fes­sor Aron­nax, the ca­reer sci­en­tist caught in an eth­i­cal con­flict; Con­seil, the com­pul­sive clas­si­fier who sup­plies hu­mor­ous tag lines for Verne’s fast facts; the har­pooner Ned Land, a crea­ture of con­stant ap­petites, man as heroic an­i­mal.</p>
			<p>But much of the novel’s brood­ing power comes from Cap­tain Nemo. In­ven­tor, mu­si­cian, Re­nais­sance ge­nius, he’s a trail­blaz­ing cre­ation, the pro­to­type not only for count­less rene­gade sci­en­tists in pop­u­lar fic­tion, but even for such var­ied fig­ures as Sher­lock Holmes or Wolf Larsen. How­ever, Verne gives his hero’s bril­liance and benev­o­lence a dark un­der­side—the man’s ob­ses­sive hate for his old en­emy. This com­pul­sion leads Nemo into ugly con­tra­dic­tions: he’s a fighter for free­dom, yet all who board his ship are im­pris­oned there for good; he works to save lives, both hu­man and an­i­mal, yet he him­self cre­ates a holo­caust; he de­tests im­pe­ri­al­ism, yet he lays per­sonal claim to the South Pole. And in this last ac­tion he falls into the clas­sic sin of Pride. He’s swiftly pun­ished. The <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i> nearly per­ishes in the Antarc­tic and Nemo sinks into a grow­ing de­pres­sion.</p>
			<p>Like Shake­speare’s King Lear he courts death and mad­ness in a great storm, then com­mits mass mur­der, col­lapses in cata­tonic paral­y­sis, and sui­ci­dally runs his ship into the ocean’s most dan­ger­ous whirlpool. Hate swal­lows him whole.</p>
			<p>For many, then, this book has been a source of fas­ci­na­tion, surely one of the most in­flu­en­tial nov­els ever writ­ten, an in­spi­ra­tion for such sci­en­tists and dis­cov­er­ers as en­gi­neer Si­mon Lake, oceanog­ra­pher Wil­liam Beebe, po­lar trav­eler Sir Ernest Shack­le­ton. Like­wise Dr. Robert <span class="name">D.</span> Bal­lard, finder of the sunken Ti­tanic, con­fesses that this was his fa­vorite book as a teenager, and Cousteau him­self, most renowned of ma­rine ex­plor­ers, called it his ship­board bible.</p>
			<p>The present trans­la­tion is a faith­ful yet com­mu­nica­tive ren­der­ing of the orig­i­nal French texts pub­lished in Paris by <span class="name">J.</span> Het­zel et Cie.—the hard­cover first edi­tion is­sued in the au­tumn of 1871, col­lated with the soft­cover edi­tions of the First and Se­cond Parts is­sued sep­a­rately in the au­tumn of 1869 and the sum­mer of 1870. Although prior English ver­sions have of­ten been heav­ily abridged, this new trans­la­tion is com­plete to the small­est sub­stan­tive de­tail.</p>
			<p>Be­cause, as that <i epub:type="se:name.publication.magazine">Time</i> cover story sug­gests, we still haven’t caught up with Verne. Even in our era of satel­lite dishes and video games, the seas keep their se­crets. We’ve seen progress in sonar, tor­pe­does, and other bel­liger­ent ma­chin­ery, but sailors and sci­en­tists—to say noth­ing of tourists—have yet to voy­age in a sub­ma­rine with the lux­ury and ef­fi­ciency of the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nau­tilus</i>.</p>
			<footer class="signature">
				<p><span class="name">F. P.</span> Wal­ter</p>
				<p>Univer­sity of Hous­ton</p>
			</footer>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
